The design of aircrafts is a complex process that involves various specialists for the huge
range of details and different aspects that have to be regarded. For each special discipline
in this domain, there exist a variety of software tools, off the shelf or self-made by the
engineers, to support the development in the current tasks at hand. Often, data has to be
exchanged between those tools, and currently, this is often a mostly manual and needlessly
time consuming task; data from one program has to be mapped accordingly for another
program, which can become difficult in programs (especially self made ones using environments like mathematica) where often just some arbitrary floats and arrays get passed
around. Also, this kind of mapping has to be done between all programs that exchange data
between one another, in the worst case in both directions, which poses an n:m relationship
regarding the data exchanges.
The basic idea behind this thesis was to use a central data model that all exchange data
from tools is mapped to. This way, there would only have to be mappings between each
tool and the central data model, changing the mapping relationship from n:m to n:1 and
thus greatly reducing the effort. Furthermore, this central data model could also be used to
perform plausibility checks on the given data to assert that the mappings are also correct,
for example regarding dimensions, units, or certain integrity constraints. Instead of using
a classic data model, the incentive was to see whether an ontology can fulfil this task.
Ontologies usually at least form a thesaurus (or to be exact, a class hierarchy) for the given
domain; furthermore, with the aid of a so-called reasoner, ontologies are also able to deduce knowledge that is only implicitly modelled. However, building an ontology is no trivial
task. In order to get a sound result, following a sophisticated development methodology is
necessary. But in order to select a methodology for this project, one has to know what kind
of ontology development methodologies exist.
Thus, the first major part of this thesis is to assemble an overview of available development methodologies, present and compare them. With these insights, it is then possible to
select a methodology to be used for the ontology development. This is the second major
part of this thesis, constructing the aircraft design ontology by following the selected ontology development methodology. The execution of the methodology will conclude with an
evaluation of the built ontology, a discussion about this execution and potential deviations
or special situations or findings, a detailed description of the built ontology, and lastly a
final conclusion of what might be interesting follow ups regarding further developments.
As for the development of the ontology, example data from three software tools that are
in use for aircraft design at Bauhaus Luftfahrt, a Munich aerospace research institute that
is the cooperating partner in this thesis, is provided as a basis and reference. The ontology
concentrates mainly on one aspect of an aircraft, which is the structure and static build-up.

the size and layout of the tail
the configuration, layout and position of the undercarriage
weight estimates that affect the design (e.g. operating weight empty, maximum
take-off- or maximum landing weight, etc.)
performance estimates and boundaries
For each of these aspects, there are lots of details that have to be decided and designed, and
for each aspect specialists and special design tools are required. As soon as the configuration
is set, the design process can continue with the next phase.
Ontology Development Process methodology for the ontology creation, i.e. the tailoring of the methodology
to this project and creation of a specification and project plan.
