Management for Professionals
Aviation Risk and Safety Management: Methods and Applications in Aviation Organizations


Aircraft
Airplane Emergency Medical Services
As low as reasonable practicable
Acceptable Means of Compliance
Air Operator Certificate
Arbeitsgesetz
Artikel/Article
Bundesamt für Zivilluftfahrt
Business Continuity Management System
Business Impact Analysis
Board of Directors
Civil Aviation Authority
Chief Executive Officer
Controlled Flight into Terrain
Chief Financial Officer
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Tradeway Commission
Corporate Risk Management
Crew Resource Management
Chief Risk Officer
Certification Specification
Distance Measuring Equipment
Department of Transportation
European Aviation Safety Agency
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization
European Convention
Electroencephalogram
Enterprise Risk Management
European Union
Federal Aviation Administration
Failure Mode Effects Analysis
Federal Office of Civil Aviation
Fellow Program in Management
Fatigue Risk Management System

Guidance Material
Hazard Identification
Helicopter Emergency Medical Services
Hochschule St. Gallen
International Business Aviation Council
International Civil Aviation Authority
Internal Control System
Instrumental Flight Rules
International Organization for Standardization
Joint Aviation Authorities
Karolinska Sleepiness Scale
Luftfahrtgesetz
Luftfahrtverordnung
Line Oriented Flight Training
Luftverkehrsabkommen
Maximum Certified Take-off Mass
Minimum Descent Altitude
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning System
Notice of Proposed Amendment
Operational Manual
Operations
Passenger/s
Pilot Flying
Pilot Not Flying
Quality Management System
Quantitative Risk Analysis
Risk & Insurance Management Society
Regierungs- und Verwaltungsorganisationsgesetz
Safety Action Group
Standards and Recommended Practices
Securities and Exchange Commission
Safety Management Manual
Safety Management System
Samn Perelli Scale
Safety Review Board
United States Dollar
Visual Analogue Scale to Evaluate Fatigue Severity
Visual Flight Rules
Very High Frequency Omni Directional Radio Range
Window of Circadian Low



The aviation industry faces a variety of risks. For this reason, risk management is
self-evident in this industry. But the aviation industry also faces a greater density of
regulations concerning risk management than other industries. For example, the
implementation of internal control systems (ICS) and safety management systems
(SMS) are often required depending on specific activities, complexity and size of
the company. The International Civil Aviation Organization’s (ICAO’s) decision to
require aviation organizations to adopt safety management systems (SMS) has
clearly focused attention on the concept of SMS. These requirements for safety
and risk management represent a huge problem, especially for small and medium
sized aviation companies because the majority is not able to appropriately deal with
the subject in order to gain advantages. The different systems are interrelated and
should be linked to the culture of companies. In fact, aviation companies need to
have risk management as a core competence if they want to operate according to
regulations and remain sustainable in the market.


To improve the currently existing levels of aviation safety, especially when considering the continuing growth of the industry, additional measures are required. One
such measure is to encourage individual aircraft operators to introduce their own
safety management system. Such a safety management system is as important to
business survival as a financial management system and should be regarded as the
core value and process of a company. One of the main purposes of an SMS is to
improve the safety performance, and therefore reduce exposure to the risk of having
an accident or suffering bankruptcy.
The implementation of a safety management system should lead to an overall
improvement of the processes of a company, and should contribute to one of civil
aviation’s key business goals: enhanced safety performance, aiming at best
practices and moving beyond full compliance with regulatory requirements.
With Amendment 30 to ICAO Annex 6 Part I, the International Civil Aviation
Organization introduced requirements for air operators to implement an acceptable
safety management system. This obligation is similar to EC 8/2008 EU OPS
1 paragraph 1.037 which requires the establishment and maintenance of an accident
prevention and flight safety program in order to improve aviation safety.
Another crucial part of risk management, namely security, is defined in regulation (EC) No 300/2008 of the European Parliament and of Council of 11 March
2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security. In order to be more
flexible in addressing evolving risk assessments, adopting security measures and
processes and to introduce new technologies in the civil aviation framework, this

Security

regulation was designed to illustrate the basic principles of what has to be done in
order to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference without going
into the technical and procedural details of how they are to be implemented.1
Although many companies and operators already use a form of safety/risk
management, this is often a long way from being designed effectively. Often
operators restrict themselves to risks on the operational level, or risk management
is considered only as prevention management. Risk management has to cover all
company areas and has to be communicated across all business functions in order to
be effective (Fig. 2.1).
There are many aviation companies that have extremely good safety records
while still operating with risky behavior characteristics or inadequate organizational structures. Fortunately, they have just not had an accident yet. However, a
good safety record does not guarantee future safety—a fact that is yet not clearly
understood by the various aviation stakeholders. Safety does not happen by chance.
In addition, small aircraft operators lack the required resources and knowledge
to implement an effective, integrated management system into their business
processes.
Sample checklists and guidance material (provided in this book) should serve as
a guideline for an appropriate way of dealing with the implementation of a
suitable SMS.


First of all the necessary scientific basis has to be explained in order to gain an
understanding of the examined subject. In relation to this, the interdisciplinary
aspects of international regulations and organizational requirements are explained.
The regulatory basics and requirements are demonstrated in a theoretical way in
order to build the foundation for a practical approach. It should serve as a guide to
how an organization, affected by safety management system requirements, can
adapt to the regulations in a size-appropriate manner and with a corresponding
suitable approach, in order to implement a safety management system in practice.
A further objective is to highlight that safety and risk management are essential
parts of an organization and vital for day to day business.
Finally, it demonstrates how safety management can be implemented by the
various aviation stakeholders. Samples and checklists serve as the guideline for a
basic SMS implementation.


Definitions

Below, the most important concepts are explained to serve as a basis of understanding for the following content.


Hazard

A hazard is a condition or an object with the potential of causing injuries to personnel,
damage to equipment or structures, loss of material, or reduction of ability to perform a
prescribed function.2

Looking at an example from the ICAO Safety Management Manual, will make it
clear how a hazard should be understood.
Consider, for example, wind, a normal component of the natural environment.
Wind is a hazard: A fifteen-knot wind, by itself, does not necessarily hold potential
for damage during aviation operations. In fact, a fifteen-knot wind blowing directly
down the runway will contribute to improving aircraft performance during departure. However, when a wind blows at fifteen knots across a runway used for
intended take-off or landing, it becomes a crosswind. It is only then, when the
hazard interfaces with the operations of the system (take-off or landing of an
aircraft) aimed at service delivery (the need to transport passengers or cargo to/from
the particular aerodrome while meeting a schedule) that its potential for damage
becomes a safety concern (a lateral runway excursion because the pilot may not be
able to control the aircraft as a consequence of the crosswind).
A hazard should not necessarily be considered as a “bad thing” or something
with a negative connotation. Hazards are an integral part of operational contexts,
and their consequences can be addressed through various mitigation strategies to
contain the hazard’s damaging potential. Hazards can be divided into three different
sub categories and can be found in all operational, natural and maintenance aspects
which have a direct influence on aircraft operations and have the potential to cause
harm. Therefore, it is of high importance to identify those hazards and keep them
controlled.3
The three categories are classified as follows:
Natural hazards can be described as an unforeseen or uncontrollable natural
event of unusual intensity which has a negative effect or possibly threatens a safe
aircraft operation. Natural hazards are classified as severe weather and climatic
2
3


events, adverse weather conditions, geophysical events, geographical
conditions, environmental events and public health events.4
Economic hazards can occur at any time within an organization, whether it is
currently in a growth period or suffering from a recession. During growth
periods, organization and safety is lacking behind the operations, while during
a recession a company tries to reduce costs and wants to avoid wasting money,
especially on costs for material and equipment. Therefore, sacrifices towards
safety might be accepted to save costs.5
Technical hazards, in general, perpetuate in all maintenance and operational
environments where humans interact with technological systems. Some
examples where technical hazards might occur are in the operational environment with aircraft and aircraft components, systems, subsystems and
corresponding equipment.6

2.4.2

Safety Risk

Risks are disruptions resulting from the unpredictability of the future caused by
accidental derogation possibilities of planned targets. Therefore, talking about risks
also means the dispersion around an expected value.
The assessment, expressed in terms of predicted probability and severity, of the consequence(s) of a hazard taking as reference the worst foreseeable situation.7

This statement is the official definition of safety risk by ICAO; it takes
into consideration the identified hazard and classifies it into two categories—
“probability” and “severity”. The term “safety risk” is the continuance of a hazard
in terms of a scenario that follows due to accepting the hazard. Since it is not only of
importance to identify hazards and then engage a mitigation process, it is also
“necessary to evaluate the seriousness of consequences, so as to define priorities
for the allocation of resources when proposing mitigation strategies”.8 A hazard
is only the condition or circumstance that can lead to physical damage or loss. It is
not to be confused with the associated safety risks. For example, an obstacle at
the end of a runway composes a hazard. This obstacle could lead to at least three
safety risks. The first safety risk would be that an aircraft might hit the
obstacle while landing or taking off. The second safety risk would be that the
pilot knows the obstacle is there and may carry out a steeper approach than normal,
in order to avoid the obstacle and arrive at the end of the runway “hot and high”,
continue with the landing and overrun the runway. A third safety risk could be
that the pilot in the second scenario recognizes that he or she is “hot and high”
and executes a “go around”. In order to know the outcome of the hazard, where
this might lead and what actions need to be taken, the safety risk has to be assessed.
This is done by classifying the safety risk into two categories9—probability and
severity.10

2.4.3

Risk Management

Risk management is generally understood as the holistic process involved in
recognizing possible risks, and the measures undertaken to reduce and monitor
them. It thus comprises a modular cycle of communication, documentation, control,
early warning mechanisms, and advancement.
This general definition of risk management as a comprehensive process can be
further concretized:
Risk Management means the permanent and systematic recording of all kinds of risks with
regard to the existence and the development of the enterprise. It involves analyzing and
prioritizing recognized risks as well as defining and implementing adequate strategic or
surgical measures to minimize non-tolerable risks.11

In this definition, the following important elements are united in connection with
risk management:
 Risk management comprises not only a unique action, but a steady process
which must be implemented in the enterprise.
 In order to not merely recognize the obvious risks, a structured procedure, aimed
at investigating and listing all risks within all ranges, is necessary.
 Each risk is to be judged individually and to be evaluated by the same yardsticks
to establish interconnections as regards the degree and kind of risk potential
involved.
 Within the scope of its risk policy, company management has to decide which
risks must be accepted, avoided or managed on the basis of their consequences
and the suitable measures that would need to be undertaken.
 The logical conversion of agreed strategic or mitigation measures to manage or
reduce potential risks.
 And finally, risk management can only be successful if newly emerging risks and
claims are communicated in a standard form on all enterprise levels (so-called
Risk Reporting) and if a suitable organization exists to ensure on-going process
optimization (so-called Risk Controlling).

9

According to the Safety Management Manual (SMM) of the ICAO.
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) (2009), pp. 5–2–8.
11
 .
10

2

Essential Basics and Limitations of Safety and Risk Management

2.4.4

13

Operational Risk Management

Operational risk is defined by the Basel Committee as “The risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external
events”. Operational risk management and line management together assess and
monitor these risks and prepare risk mitigating strategies and actions. The Business
Continuity Plan is a response prepared to react to a subset of operational risks,
defined by the scope and size of events: The focus of Business Continuity Management is not on risks to the core-business objectives, but on external risks that lie
outside the competencies of the business and cause significant business disruption
that might threaten the survival of the company.

2.4.5

Risk Appetite

“Risk appetite is the amount of risk, on a broad level, an organization is willing to
accept in pursuit of value. Each organization pursues various objectives to add
value and should broadly understand the risk it is willing to undertake in doing
so.”12 No organization can achieve its objectives without taking risks but the level
and amount of risks an organisation has to take, cannot be clearly specified. The
biggest challenge is to manage the taken risks continuously.13

2.4.6

Risk Mitigation

Risk mitigation is the process of lowering a risk to a level which is as low as
reasonably practical.14 Risks have to be identified and classified in order to develop
and apply the right mitigation measures. The process of risk mitigation makes it
possible for air operators to accept certain risks in daily operations and classify
them according to company policies and procedures. It ensures that changes or new
situations are assessed according to their safety significance, and classifies them
according to their safety severity. Risk mitigation measures often incorporate a cost
benefit analysis. This analysis has to determine whether risk mitigation makes
economic sense, or whether the organization has to accept the risk, or if it has to
cancel the operation.



Safety

The term safety has different meanings and depends on perspective and context.
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) considers safety as:
The state in which the risk to harm to persons or damage to property is reduced to, and
maintained at or below, an acceptable level through a continuing process of hazard
identification and risk management.15

Often, safety is understood as the condition of zero incidents. When being
familiar with the hazardous environment in aviation, it becomes clear that the
risk of incidents is always present. The question is not about how safe a company
is, but more how safe a company wants to be and what measures have to be taken to
reach this defined goal. Safety must be interpreted as a result of efficient review and
management behavior of organizational processes, with the target to control safety
risks and hazards in the operational environment.

2.4.8

Safety Management System

A safety management system can be described as a set of processes or components
that combines operational and technical systems with financial and human resource
management. Those processes are present in every activity of the aviation
stakeholders. It is a methodical approach to safety with the focus on goal setting
and a clear definition of accountability throughout the operator’s organization. The
intention of a safety management system is to develop and sensitize the company
away from a reactive to a proactive generative safety culture in order to identify
hazards and possible incidents before they can occur.
A SMS aims at continuous improvement to the overall level of safety while
measuring performance, analyzing processes and becoming an integral part of the
company’s business management activities and corporate culture. As a consequence, the implementation of a SMS requires processes which allow the control
of safety risks and introduces the concept of the acceptable level of safety.

2.4.9

Safety Culture

An organization’s culture is defined by what the people do and which decisions they
take. This reveals the basic values of an organization. A positive safety culture will
move a company forward to a maximum achievable safety level, despite business
cycles and times of recession where financial pressure is evident. A positive safety
culture can be split into four different components:
15

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) (2009).

2

Essential Basics and Limitations of Safety and Risk Management

15

 Informed culture: The people who manage the system have sufficient knowledge in all functional areas of human resources and maintenance, as well as
environmental and organizational aspects which have a direct link to safety.
They understand the hazards and risks involved in daily operations.
 Reporting culture: The basis for a reporting culture is an atmosphere of trust,
where people are encouraged to report their errors or near misses. Those reports
provide essential information which can be used to avoid the same mistakes
being repeated.
 Just culture: Based on the reporting culture and understood as a ‘blame-free’
culture, employees are supported by providing essential safety related information. Furthermore, it is quite clear where the line is drawn between acceptable
and unacceptable behavior, and when unsafe acts will call for disciplinary
action.
 Learning culture: A company must strive for constant improvement and must
share the ‘lessons learned’ to draw the right conclusions from its safety management system. It possesses the willingness to challenge its basic assumptions and
should change processes when inadequacies have been identified.
Looking at the above mentioned characteristics, it becomes clear that it is not an
easy task to establish a safety culture—it is more a development which takes time
and commitment, and must be understood by everyone within an organization.
Therefore, establishing a safety culture is one of the most challenging elements of a
SMS. Creating a safety culture begins at the top level of an organization, with the
incorporation of policies and procedures which establish a reporting culture (often
also implied when referring to the term “just culture”).
A safety culture is characterized by structures which allow safety-related information to be identified on all organizational levels and entered into a system
empowered to correct and deal with these problems.
In order to support a reporting culture, the organization must cultivate the
willingness of its members to report errors. The organization has to make the
commitment not to punish errors, as long as they are not reckless. Then these
reports become valuable sources in the context of hazard identification and, more
importantly, build the foundation for an effective SMS.

2.5

Limitations

There are some topics connected to risk management which are important but are
not, or only briefly, discussed in the present work. The following list provides a
brief overview of the limitations.

2.5.1

Quality Management

This book will not describe the differences between quality and safety management.
We can only highlight that quality and safety management systems both have to be

16

 

planned and managed, as neither quality nor safety happen by chance. Quality
systems do not investigate incidents or accidents for risk assessment. Quality
systems audit the output of a process only in terms of variance, and make
adjustments. A SMS investigates events, looking for contributing factors from all
influencing sources. Both depend upon measurement and monitoring, and together
they encompass every function, process and member of staff, while striving for
continuous improvement.

2.5.2

Emergency Response Planning

In the context of risk and safety management, we don’t want to focus in detail on the
development and implementation of emergency response planning and crisis management. We aim to focus more on proactive and preventive measures in order to
prevent crisis scenarios.

2.5.3

Corporate Risk Management

The book does not focus on Corporate Risk Management or owner (leasing) risks.
We will only partially describe corporate governance, with our focal point on the
management level.

2.5.4

Aircraft Development and Testing Activities

All development activities for aerospace products including specific verification
and validation, monitoring, measuring and testing activities, and product acceptance criteria are excluded in this version. In relation to this, there is no focus on
FMEA or any other design and development related processes.

2.5.5

Actuarial Calculation of Risks for Insurances

Insurances are an important tool for hedging and the passing-on of risks. Companies
with well-developed risk management gain cheaper access to capital; additionally,
they can also negotiate favorable deals or reduced premiums with insurance
providers. This is indeed an important development as risk management now
makes direct financial sense, contradicting the belief of many skeptics who felt
risk management was just a cost center and a bureaucratic exercise.16 Furthermore,
risk management has a high priority in the insurance industry and is a basic service
for the insured company. The main application of insurances, from a business
16

Essential Basics and Limitations of Safety and Risk Management

17

perspective, is the protection of property, plant and equipment, along with material
items of current assets, and the consequential damages resulting from the loss of
operational capabilities. In addition, liability insurance which covers third party
damage, personal injury claims, property damage and financial loss are further
services by insurance companies.17 Despite the importance of insurance, further
analysis on how to calculate insurance risks is not directly relevant to the main
themes of this book.


Theoretical Background of Risk and Safety
Management



Necessity and Development of Risk
Management
Roland Müller and Christopher Drax

Every company faces different types of risks. Unfortunately, risks are often
detected too late, so neither sufficient time nor adequate measures are available to
prevent damage resulting from the realization of the risk potential. To prevent this,
farsighted management seeks to identify potential risks and, where possible, to
minimize the most dangerous ones for the company through appropriate strategic
and operational measures. Therefore, consciously or unconsciously, each organizational management applies Risk Management. In fact, Risk Management is an
inalienable and indefeasible duty of the Board of Directors. The Swiss code of
obligations specifies in Article 716a under no. 1 that the direction of the organization is necessarily assigned to the board.
This includes the duty to avoid unnecessary risks and to minimize unavoidable
risks to ensure the existence and further development of the company. As a
consequence of the amendment of the Limited Liability Company Law of
1.1.2008,1 the annex to the financial statements must state information about the
implementation of a risk assessment.
If the risk assessment and risk mitigation is to be more than an occasional and
coincidental event, the organizational structures, responsible personnel and the
applicable processes have to be defined. In order to compare the efficiency of
Risk Management between different companies, a certain standardization of the
following points is necessary2:

Terminology related to the words used
Risk management process
Organizational structure for Risk Management
Objectives of Risk Management
Such a risk management standard was created in England after extensive
consultations with various professional associations such as the Institute of Risk
Management (IRM),3 the Association of Insurance and Risk Managers (AIRMIC)4
and the National Forum for Risk Management in the Public Sector (ALARM).5
The Federation of European Risk Management Association (FERMA) is trying
to implement this standard in practice, so that organizations and companies can
measure themselves against it. Where applicable, the definitions of the International
Standard Organization (ISO) will be used.

3.1

Importance of Risk Management

Risk is considered as an essential element of strategic management and is currently
discussed in many empirical industry studies and is prominent in connection with
firm and business unit performance. Especially in times of crisis, the strategic
importance of Risk Management becomes quite clear. The massive increase in
forecast uncertainty leads to a competitive advantage for companies that can
interpret and manage risks better than others. As companies are usually only able
to achieve higher returns by simultaneously taking additional risks, Risk Management in particular has to decide what kinds of risks are acceptable for an organization.6 Ruefli et al. argued that we lack a generally accepted model of strategic risk
taking which is based on the various connections within firms and the interplay
among decision makers, organizational processes, and market and industry factors
that have an influence on the judgment of risk and strategic risk taking in an
organized way.7
Strategic Risk Management can be described as a process for identifying,
assessing and managing risk anywhere in the strategy, with the goal of protecting
and creating shareholder and stakeholder value. Strategic Risk Management is the
primary component and basis of enterprise Risk Management and is affected by
boards of directors, management and others. A strategic view of risk is required in
order to understand how external and internal events or scenarios will affect an
organization in the pursuit of reaching its strategic objectives. Furthermore,
3

Necessity and Development of Risk Management

23

Strategic Risk Management can only work if an organization defines tolerable
levels of risk, or risk appetite, as a guide for strategic decision making. Finally, it
is an ongoing process which needs to be embedded in strategy definition and
strategic management.8 The current financial and economic crisis has put financial
management and controlling in affected companies under intense pressure. Plans
and budgets abruptly lost their basis and companies had to deal with unexpected
and completely new scenarios. While performance management, value generation
and growth for many businesses had, for decades, stood in the foreground, the focus
shifted suddenly towards Risk Management, liquidity assurance and business
preservation. Emphasis is now placed on increased communication, particularly
relating to the desired handling of risks. The focus is on the creation of awareness
for company-wide, acceptable risks, as well as on what kind of risks are unacceptable and have to be avoided. In connection with this, the link between risk and
performance has to be communicated to the employees in order to achieve awareness of that specific interdependency. In this context, the aspect of trust plays an
important role.9
In addition to Ruefli et al., Frigo and Anderson also argued that Strategic Risk
Management is still a relatively undeveloped activity in many companies, and that
managers are reluctant to invest in risk functions. Even though Risk Management has
become quite prominent in many companies, no significant financial investment has
been made during recent years. The study further revealed that less than one-half of
companies invested in risk processes; whereas, less than one quarter allocated funds
for the training of employees with central risk functions. Constant cost pressures and
budget cuts are limiting investments, but companies have to be careful not to
compromise the effectiveness of a working risk management system/approach.10
When systems increase in size and become more connected, the complexity
increases as well. Furthermore, large systems become unmanageable and irretrievable failures are more likely to happen. Without a doubt, with the complexity of
organizations today and, to a greater extent those of the future, all institutions will
face huge challenges when managing that situation. The chance of accidents is high
and managers have to be able to respond in an appropriate way.11
Given the fact that Risk Management in Austrian companies is mainly understood as a top management task, 83 % of Austrian CFOs indicated they were
responsible for Risk Management. The survey further showed that there is a
relatively weak agreement on the question of whether there is a need for Risk
Management primarily through regulatory/corporate external authorities/systems
(for example, law or Corporate Governance Code). This may be an indication that
companies don’t see Risk Management as a regulatory obligation, but rather a
process for active value creation.12

 

The global financial crisis has revealed that strengthening Risk Management and
corporate governance are major challenges for organizations. A lesson learned is
the necessity to clearly link the corporate strategy and Risk Management, and to
identify and manage risk in a highly uncertain environment.13
On average, companies are reasonably satisfied with their Risk Management.
However, companies across all industries see significant potential for improvement
in risk management systems, in particular the link between Risk Management and
strategic planning.14 Certainly, Risk Management is not a new concept to
businesses and managers, but the growing complexity and speed in the business
environment have increased the necessity of a structured approach towards managing risks. Risk management systems and processes have evolved especially for
enterprise wide, risk facing organizations. The growing awareness of risks is
reflected in the fact it is now a central topic for boards and audit committees.
Nevertheless, until a few years ago, there was still no accepted standard available to
structure the company wide risk management activities.15
In the aviation industry, risks can be broken down into two different levels,
namely the strategic and process levels.
Risk at the strategic and process levels is comprised of the following sub
categories described in Fig. 3.1.
Recent discussions have shown that there is an ongoing conflict between the
operational and strategic levels within various aviation organizations. Operational
stakeholders feel increasingly patronized by financial controlling when carrying out
risk assessments. Further communication and harmonization efforts have to be
initiated in order to solve these internal discrepancies.

3.2

Regulation of Risk Management

Law has been the main driving force for better Corporate Governance practices in
Switzerland and therefore also a main driver for Risk Management. Since 1936
there have only been minor changes to the law, with reforms in 1968 and 1992. The
Stock Exchange Act, which was implemented in 1996, had a strong influence on
Corporate Governance practices. The code of obligations triggered many
developments, such as increased transparency, auditing and compensation disclosure along the lines of the Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX).16
13
A few regulations in Air Law have to be pointed out in order to understand the
regulatory framework of risk management in the aviation business.
3.2.1.3 International
The ICAO describes, with its Fatigue Management SARPs in Appendix 8 of Part I
to Annex 6, the components that must be in an FRMS. In addition, the associated
guidance material provides further information on how an FRMS should function.
Part II of Annex 6 describes the operations of Aircraft in International General
Aviation (GA) and provides standards and recommended practices (SARPs) for
international GA operators.
Regulation (EC) 300/2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security
specifies, under Art. 4, the local risk assessment through the local authorities and
lays down more stringent measures that have to be applied by Member States after
the risk assessment under Art. 6.
Commission Regulation 8/2008, the so called (EU-OPS), regulates common
technical requirements and administrative procedures applicable to commercial
transportation by aircraft. It states under 1.037 that an operator shall establish and
maintain an accident prevention and flight safety program, which may be integrated
with the quality system.
Commission Regulation 185/2010 states detailed measures for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security. More specifically under
1.3.1.5,where persons other than passengers and items carried have to be screened
on a continuous random basis and under 1.5.2, the frequency and means of
undertaking surveillance and patrols shall be based on a risk assessment undertaken
by the appropriate authority. Paragraph 4.3.2 describes that an air carrier will be
notified in writing and in advance by the competent authority about their risk
assessment of individuals and of their plan when embarking a potentially disruptive
passenger on board its aircraft.
Commission Regulation EU 1178/2011 (EASA FCL & MED) lays down technical requirements and administrative procedures related to civil aviation aircrews.
Art. 4 (c) specifies that student authorizations will be issued on the basis of an
individual safety risk assessment carried out by an instructor following a concept
safety risk assessment carried out by the Member State. In addition, FCL.820 lit.
(d) specifies the flight test rating requirements.
3.2.1.4 National
The Swiss Verordnung über die Luftfahrt (Luftfahrtverordnung, LFV) points out
the obligation to implement a SMS under Art. 103a LFV. Furthermore, Art. 122h
LFV regulates the deployment of a security officer in conjunction with the federal
risk analysis. Art. 122k LFV illustrates the responsibility of the federal police for

3

Necessity and Development of Risk Management

27

the risk analysis and the associated use of security officers. Finally, Art. 122m LFV
regulates the obligations of airlines to participate during certain scenarios.

3.2.2

Swiss Code of Obligations

In the Swiss Code of Obligations (CO) under article 716a No. 1 the ultimate
direction of the company is assigned to the Board of Directors (BoD) which has
the duty to avoid unnecessary risks and minimise unavoidable risks in order to
assure the existence and progression of the organization. Therefore, the BoD has to
specify the organization’s risk appetite and the corresponding risk control policies.
As explained in the previous chapter, the risk goals have to be aligned with the
organization’s strategic business objectives. Article 716b OR states that the BoD
can delegate operational risk management to the management. Moreover, there is
no requirement for a Chief Risk Officer (CRO) for organizations smaller than
500 employees.
As mentioned in the introduction, the amendment of the Limited Liability
Company Law of 1.1.2008 made it mandatory that organizations state, within
their annex to the financial statements, information about the implementation of a
risk assessment.
For specific types of companies, for example the limited liability company
(GmbH) and the cooperative, explicit reference is made in connection to the
accounting rules and the rights and obligations of the corporation. Thus, the
requirement for the publication of information on the implementation of a risk
assessment has to be annexed to the financial statements for these companies.
Consequently, risk management must ultimately be considered as a necessity on
the list of responsibilities of the strategic management level for all types of
companies, including associations and foundations.

3.2.3

Bank Regulations

The Swiss Banks and Saving Banks Regulation (SR 952.02) defines, under Article
9, the fundamental regulations of risk management for the banking sector. Banks
have to implement and document procedures for the inclusion of business risks in
internal guidelines and regulations. In addition, banks are required to seize, limit,
and supervise market, credit, loss, transactions, liquidities and image risks in
particular, as well as operational and legal risks.17 Furthermore, the Swiss Bankers
Association adopted guidelines for Risk Management in their trade and derivatives
business in 1996.


Exchange Commission (SEC) and the US government responded to these disasters,
and to the growing need for security, by enacting new acts and regulations, most
significantly the Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX). SOX had an enormous impact on
Swiss Corporate Governance Law as some elements of SOX were incorporated in
Swiss requirements made by Basel II type regulations. Table 3.1 shows how Swiss
rules and regulations have been affected by SOX and New York Stock Exchange
regulations.

3.2.7

Press

The press plays a significant role in bringing issues to the attention of the public,
thus supporting the worldwide interest in corporate governance that has grown in
the light of so many corporate scandals. Issues such as Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), Mad Cow disease (BSE), the September 11 terrorist attack and
corporate scandals like Swiss air and Enron, have initiated political debates and
created an increased awareness among society and business towards risks and risk
management.
In addition, there are various other sources which have an influence on corporate
governance and risk management in Switzerland which are illustrated in Fig. 3.2.

3.3

Milestones in Risk Management History

The development of risk management can be divided into five different stages. Each
stage has its own characteristics and different focus.
The 1930s marked stage one with the beginning of new concepts and
discussions, a preliminary stage of Risk Management.
Stage two evolved during the 1970s with formal Risk Management which
mainly focused on dealing with credit risks.


With the beginnings of Risk Management, the subject only dealt with isolated
security measures, including some loss prevention and a bundle of largely uncoordinated insurances.20 In the 1930s, the Glass-Stegall Act prohibited common
ownership of banks, investment banks, and insurance companies. In 1945, Congress
passed the McCarran-Ferguson Act, delegating the regulation of insurance to the
various states.21
Necessity and Development of Risk Management

3.3.2

31

Credit Risk Management

During the 1970s stage two evolved with the focus on insurance management,
i.e. the co-ordination of pure insurance, which could be considered as traditional
risk transfer.22 Important milestones in risk management during these years were
the foundation of a few associations with a strong focus on Risk Management, for
example the International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics or the
“Risk Management Circle” of Sweden’s Statsföretag. The American Society of
Insurance Management was renamed Risk & Insurance Management Society
(RIMS). Fortune magazine published the article “The Risk Management Revolution”23 suggesting co-ordination of formerly unconnected risk management
functions within an organization, and acceptance by the Board of Directors
(BoD) of responsibility for preparing organizational policies and supervision of
the risk management functions.

3.3.3

Financial Risk Management

In the third stage, the 1980s, the development of Risk Management diversified in
two directions: One was risk financing, including concerted deductibles, captives,
and various mixed forms; the second was risk control in the sense of comprehensive
risk engineering, partially in close co-ordination with insurance coverage. At the
end of the 1980s, Risk Management experienced an expansion in the direction of
risk communication, primarily as a consequence of a loss of trust after large-scale
accidents in the concerned insurance sectors.24

3.3.4

Operational Risk Management

Stage four began in the 1990s. In certain industrial insurance markets, crises
affected relationships between industrial insurers and big clients.25 The term
Chief Risk Officer (CRO) was used for the first time by James Lam at GE Capital,
who described the function of the CRO as managing all aspects of risk. Operational
risk management plays an important role when talking about aviation safety. The
operational side of aviation is a hazardous environment with many factors
contributing to unsafe situations. Therefore, special attention has to be placed on
that area.
 

Corporate Risk Management

The 9/11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Centre, New York26 gave a new
dimension to the magnitude of volatility and risk. The New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) lost trillions of USD in a day. This had an enormous impact on the
perception of risk management worldwide.27 Today, companies embrace the concept of enterprise risk management which takes an overall view of all internal and
external risks affecting the organization, and aims to provide an integrated
approach to managing risks across divisions and functions. This has given rise to
concepts of business continuity management where companies make sure that they
survive even extreme events, such as terrorist acts, natural disasters, epidemics, and
major failures.

3.3.6

Compliance Management

A significant, current trend is the increasing regulation in the risk management and
safety management sector which can be considered as a real challenge, especially
for the aviation industry. These regulations require additional resources to set up
and implement different obligatory mechanisms or systems and require on-going
compliance monitoring and audits. Figure 3.3 provides a graphic illustration of
these developments and also shows how risk management has evolved during the
past decades.

3.4

General Risk Management Models

The following risk management frameworks illustrate a structured approach
towards the management of risks.

3.4.1

COSO Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework

The COSO model can be considered as the oldest risk management framework. It
was initially developed to improve the quality of financial reporting within ethically
aware companies, in combination with an effective internal control system. In 1985
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO)
was established as a platform for the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial
Reporting. The system was approved in 1992 by the SEC (Securities and Exchange
Commission) as standard for the internal control system and was constantly developed further throughout the following years.28

Necessity and Development of Risk Management
The COSO Enterprise Risk-Management Framework comprises three interrelated dimensions which are illustrated in.
The first dimension shows the main components which are common to the
managerial level and are integrated within the overall management process.
1. Internal Environment: The internal environment describes how managers,
employees and the whole organization views and addresses risks including
Risk Management philosophy and risk appetite, integrity and ethical values, as
well as the environment in which they operate.
2. Objective Setting: An organization should follow clear objectives. It is vital for
the organization to identify the associated risks which should be in line with the
risk policy, and consistent with the risk appetite of the organization.
3. Event Identification: Internal and external events affecting the achievement of
the organization’s objectives must be identified. Moreover, having distinguished
risks from opportunities, the opportunities should be channeled back into management strategy or objective-setting processes.
4. Risk Assessment: The identified risks are classified according to their likelihood
and impact. Likelihood and impact are assessed in order to obtain a solid basis
for the risk response.
5. Risk Response: Management is responsible for the initiation of risk responses.
These include, but are not limited to, avoiding, accepting, reducing or sharing
risks and encompass the development of an appropriate set of actions to align
risks with the entity’s risk tolerances.
6. Control Activities: In order to track that the risk responses are effectively
carried out, specific policies and procedures have to be established and
implemented.
7. Information and Communication: Relevant information has to be identified
and communicated in order to enable employees and management to carry out
their responsibilities. Effective communication occurs horizontally as well as
vertically in modern organizations.


8. Monitoring: Enterprise Risk Management is illustrated and documented
throughout the organization. Monitoring is accomplished through ongoing management activities, separate evaluations, or both.
The second dimension, on top, classifies the different types of risks or the
entity’s objectives within an organization. COSO distinguishes between strategic,
operational, reporting and compliance risks.
The third dimension illustrates risk management in relation to the entirety of an
organization’s enterprise risk management. This comprises the entity level, division, business unit or subsidiary.29



The ISO 31000:2009 Risk Management Principles and Guidelines is the worldwide
available standard for risk management. The purpose of the ISO 31000 standard is
to integrate and adapt the risk management process to already available management systems, in order to optimize and tailor the risk management process to the
needs of organizations and not to just fulfill compliance issues.
The system is based on the following core principles:
 Top Management is accountable for Risk Management, which has to be constantly monitored and controlled.
 Risks have to be communicated throughout the organization on all operational
management levels and not just on a strategic level. The initiation of the risk
management process has to be communicated top down through all management
levels.
 Finally the ISO standard tries to identify all the different internal and external
risks throughout an organization. These identified risks influence the overall
implementation of the risk management system.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the systemic approach of the ISO 31000 which combines
the risk management process, and integration into the risk management system. The
risk management process defines the procedure of identifying risks, analyzing and
evaluating them including the application of appropriate mitigation measures and
the final communication throughout the organization. The risk management system
includes all measures like planning, implementation, evaluation and continuous
improvement in terms of the Deming Circle30 and should be understood as a vital
part of the strategic management of an organization.

3.4.3

ISO 22301 Business Continuity Management

A Business Continuity Management System (BCMS) aims to make public and
private organizations more resilient in times of extreme events. This standard
supports organizations of any size to proactively prepare for managing disruption
which might endanger the survival of a company. Typically, incidents can disrupt
the business environment or even directly affect an organization negatively. ISO


 prepares organizations for disruptive events and ensures that they can respond
in an appropriate manner and protect and continue their operations.31
The ISO 22301 structure focuses on specific key areas which are crucial for
business continuity planning.
 Part 4: Context of the Organization
 Part 5: Leadership
 Part 6: Planning
 Part 7: Support
 Part 8: Operation
 Part 9: Performance Evaluation
 Part 10: Improvement
Part 4 of the standard focuses on the context of the organization and determines
the external and internal issues which could have an effect on the organization. This
part especially focuses on the potential impact a disruptive event might have on the
organization’s activities, functions, services, products, relationships with interested
parties, supply chains, and partnerships. It makes the link between the business
continuity policy and the organization’s objectives, policies and risk management
strategy. Furthermore, it takes the legal, regulatory and additional requirements of
the organization into account.
Part 5 concentrates on the leadership aspect, which requires ongoing commitment to the BCMS by top management. Here it is important that the BCMS is
compatible with the strategic organization which requires the integration into
established business processes, and the provision of the necessary resources.
Responsibilities and areas of authority have to be clearly delegated and have to
be constantly assessed. In addition, the communication of the significance of the
BCMS and constant monitoring, direction and support are required in order to
ensure efficient implementation.
Part 6 is the planning phase where the objectives are developed on how to treat
the identified risks and how to comply with organizational requirements. The
objectives have to be measurable and consistent with the business continuity policy,
and have to assess the minimum level of products and services that is acceptable for
the organization to survive.
Part 7 deals with the assignment of the appropriate resources for each task. Only
competent staff with relevant training is qualified to perform the implementation
and maintenance of a BCMS. Furthermore, the creation, update and control of the
required documentation is specified in this part.
Part 8 deals with the operation of the BCMS. By performing a Business Impact
Analysis (BIA) an organization can identify critical processes that support its key
products and services and their interdependencies between each other. Moreover,
an organization can identify the required resources to operate the processes at a
minimally-acceptable level. In addition, a solid risk assessment is the key to a solid
Business Impact Analysis. These points have to be considered when documenting


the business continuity procedures which aim to minimize the consequences of
disruptive events through the implementation of appropriate mitigation strategies.
Part 9 specifies the performance evaluation and the permanent monitoring of the
systems to improve their operation. This will be assured by constant monitoring of
compliance, historical evidence, internal audits and ongoing management reviews.
Part 10 emphasizes the continuous improvement of the effectiveness of the
system, its inherent processes, and objectives.32



Companies that are subject to regular audits must continue to confirm the existence
of an internal control system (ICS). To date, auditors assess the internal control
system only to obtain an understanding of the entity to be audited for consideration
in the preparation of the ICS audit strategy and the audit approach.
This chapter provides an overview of:
 The concept and objectives of an Internal Control System
 The different components of an Internal Control System
 Tasks and responsibilities and
 Minimum requirements for an Internal Control System

An internal control system encompasses all processes, methods and measures
arranged by the directors and the senior management that serve to ensure the proper,
ongoing conduct of a business. The organizational measures of the internal control
are integrated in the operational processes, which means they are part of the work
execution.
In this case, a current state is determined and compared with a target value
(target state). The Internal Control is supportive of:
 The achievement of business objectives through effective and efficient
management
 Compliance with laws and regulations (compliance)

The protection of business assets
The prevention, reduction and detection of errors and irregularities
Ensuring the reliability and completeness of the accounting
Timely and reliable financial reporting
The main tasks of an internal control system (ICS) are, on the one hand, to
improve the reliability and completeness of the accounting and external financial
reporting (accounting), and, on the other, the prevention and detection of errors and
irregularities including fraud in accounting and financial reporting.

4.1.1

Components of an ICS

The design and the implementation of an ICS depend on the size of the business, the
business risks and the complexity of the organization. Smaller companies can more
easily achieve the objectives of an ICS with less formal means and simpler
processes and structures.
Based on COSO, the components of an ICS are subsequently divided into the
following five categories:
Category
Control Environment

Risk Assessment

Control Activities

Description
The design of the control environment of a company comprises various
components and the way management influences the processes in the
company.
These include regulations for the delegation of tasks and
responsibilities, communication and enforcement of integrity and
ethical values, commitment to competence, the involvement of those
responsible for the management and supervision, leadership principles
and management style, organizational structure and, finally, interaction
with employees and customers.
Every organization needs to be aware of the risks that it is exposed to
and how to manage these risks. The risk assessment typically involves:
 Specification of corporate objectives and risk management objectives
(safety objectives), Department of Risk Management Policies
 Risk identification (identifying the principal risks that could result in
a misstatement in the accounts, and the accounting and business risks
that could affect the financial reporting)
 Risk assessment (assessment of the importance of a risk, and
assessment of the likelihood of occurrence)
 Information/communication (defining who, when, what is to be
informed)
 Risk Management (decisions about possible measures)
 Monitoring of the control measures
Each company must define and implement instructions and procedures
to ensure that those activities which have been considered as necessary
targets by the BoD and the Executive Board are actually executed.
Examples of control activities are the processes of authorization
(authorization levels, signature policies), work instructions,
performance monitoring, entry rights in IT processes, physical controls
and segregation of duties/4-eyes principle.
(continued)


Description
Information and communication channels must be defined so that the
board and the employees have the right information at the right time in
order to perform the required activities/controls.
Information systems that ensure that all relevant information is reliable
and timely collected, processed and distributed are a prerequisite.
The ICS is only effective if the control measures are reliable in the long
term. Therefore, the ICS must be constantly monitored so that it
remains effective. This includes a timely review of the structure and
function of the controls by supervisors and the implementation of
necessary corrective measures.

ICS Tasks and Responsibilities

The responsibility for the implementation of an ICS is with the Board of Directors;
respectively it’s the Audit Committee. Primarily, the BoD has to make sure that the
appropriate control measures are taken so that misstatements of transactions and the
related statements are prevented, detected or can be corrected. The management,
however, is responsible for the operation and maintenance. The tasks and responsibilities in the area of the ICS can be illustrated as follows:
Board of Directors resp. its
Audit Committee

Management

Implementing and maintaining a functioning internal control
system as the core of the monitoring function of the BoD in
relation to the accounting of the company. In particular, the
set-up of the processes in relation to:
 Targets
 Scope and expansion level of the ICS
 Documentation requirements
 Reporting requirements
Ensuring the implementation of the measures to be taken by the
management related to the framework of the ICS
Maintaining an adequate monitoring of the effectiveness of the
ICS. This requires:
 Regular consultation with management (effectiveness of the ICS)
 Evaluation of reviews by the management of the ICS
 Initiation and monitoring of measures to correct deficiencies
 Use of Internal Audit for the monitoring and evaluation of the ICS
Implementation of the principles defined by the BoD:
 A systematic approach to the collection of an adequate control
structure
 Development of appropriate processes for the identification,
assessment, monitoring and control of identified risks
 Identification of key controls and their monitoring, and
ensuring that corrective measures are taken
 The maintenance and documentation of an organizational
structure that clearly functions in line with all assigned
responsibilities, skills and information flows
(continued)

42

 

 Documentation and verifiability of the ICS regarding the
reliability of financial reporting, and for ensuring the
fulfillment of delegated tasks
 Ensuring the necessary technical and human resources and
quality of staff (training, experience)
Auditors (based on Article
727 OR)

 Verification of the existence of the ICS
 Reporting to the General Assembly
 Detailed reporting to the Board of Directors regarding the audit
of the ICS

The Board has to periodically deal with the following fundamental issues in
relation to the ICS:
1. Are all significant risks in the operational business processes known?
2. Are there measures that reduce these significant risks to an acceptable level for
the company?
3. Do BoD and Management receive the guarantee that the ICS is actually effective
and operating efficiently?
4. Do organization and corporate culture allow for continuous improvement of
processes and controls?

4.1.3

Minimum Requirements for an ICS

The Fiduciary Chamber, as a professional organization for accountants in
Switzerland has issued a position paper, which states that the degree and the
requirements for an ICS have to be adapted to the complexity and size of the
organization. In particular, the size and activities of the company, the number and
complexity of transactions, the ownership structure and financing play a role. In
determining the requirements of the ICS, the Board of Directors considers the
principle aspects of effectiveness, accountability and efficiency:
Aspect
Effectiveness

Traceability

Efficiency

Meaning/content/expression
 Compliance with the corporate culture
 Clearly defined responsibilities
 Controls are aligned to risks
 Controls are integrated into processes and are monitored
 Sufficient tested controls
 Well trained employees
 A clearly defined information and escalation process
 ICS objectives and degree of expansion are documented
 Business risks are documented
 Processes and controls are recorded in writing
 Control activities are clearly documented
 The quality of the ICS is regularly assessed and reported
 ICS is an integral part of the enterprise-wide risk management
 Use of internal audit and coordination with auditors
 Focusing on key risks
 Possibility to automate the controls


There are no statutory regulations on the scope and the minimum requirements
for the ICS.1 However, the ICS must meet certain requirements to ensure that the
auditor can confirm its existence:
 The ICS must be documented
 The ICS has to have the size relevant to business risks and be appropriate to the
scope of the business
 The ICS must be communicated to the employees
 The ICS must be applied and has to be implemented
 The company must have a control consciousness
An internal control system, like the company, has to develop itself further and
further. The adaption to changing environmental conditions is of central importance. Globalization, competitive pressures, new technologies and legal changes
have, therefore, always to be included into business processes. In addition, the ICS
must be continually reviewed and the responsible manager has to react immediately
if adjustments are needed. The costs, however, have to always be kept in mind. The
costs of establishing and maintaining the ICS are, in the medium term, certainly
expected to be offset by the following benefits:
 Clear organization, roles and responsibilities within the company
 Identified business risks associated with controls, a step towards Enterprise Risk
Management (ERM)
 Identification of efficiency potential in business processes
 Reduced amount of error corrections (since errors are detected more quickly)
 Development of control consciousness of employees at all levels
 Increased confidence in the financial report (stakeholders)
 Improved corporate monitoring
 Eliminated redundancies in the controlling processes
 Reduced risk of fraud
 Fewer error corrections during the audit
Such an ICS almost automatically satisfies the requirements for auditability; the
compliance can be regarded as a “by-product”.
Fundamentals and Structure of Safety
Management Systems in Aviation
Roland Müller and Christopher Drax

To understand the fundamentals and the structure of a Safety Management System
the developments and the basics have to be explained. This chapter provides an
overview of:
 The general development of safety and accidents
 The organizational accident causation by James Reason
 The regulatory environment
 The structure and objectives of a Safety Management System

5.1

Development of Safety and Accidents

As having an acceptable air safety record is an important indicator of an airline’s
success, improving safety has constantly been a major focus for the aviation
industry. Over the past years there has been a constant increase in the reliability
of machines and software in the aviation industry. Unfortunately, the reliability of
humans and organizational systems has not improved at the same speed.1
The early years of commercial aviation were notorious for underdeveloped
technology and inadequate infrastructure, where limited oversight by the
authorities, and almost no regulation, was common practice. The aviation business
was driven by production demands and there was no understanding of safety
management measures, like hazard identification and Risk Management. Aviation
developed very quickly with ambitious production objectives which lacked the
1

 

necessary means and resources for safety management and was characterized by a
high frequency in breakdowns and accidents.
The former principals of accident prevention and investigation were driven by
reactive processes. Outcomes only became visible after an accident had already
happened. With increasing regulation during the 1950s, advanced technology and
the fast development of infrastructure, accident rates declined steadily. The common thinking in those days was as long as rules were followed, there should be no
safety violation.
The belief was that only if rules are disregarded, could eventual breakdowns be
considered. It was possible to minimize risks by introducing regulatory limitations,
but with the increase in aviation complexity it became impossible to cover all
operational scenarios in such a dynamic environment. Accident investigations
mainly had the focus on technological breakdowns with less focus on human or
organizational factors.
The typical approach for the identification of the cause of an accident was to ask
what, who and when. This ignored the why and how an accident happened, which
are of real importance to fully understanding the safety breakdowns or hazardous
conditions. Recent years have shown that the perception has changed towards
understanding why and how accidents happened. When looking at the development
of safety thinking, the first years of aviation until the 1970s can certainly be seen as
the “technical era” where safety violations and concerns were typically linked to
technical factors.
Given the fact that technology was not fully developed to cope with mass
transportation demand, technological failures were a recurring factor. Therefore,
the main focus in those days was put on the investigation and improvement of
technical issues. During the 1970s major technical improvements like radar, jet
engines, autopilots, flight directors, improved navigation and performance enhancing technologies, both on the ground and in the air, were introduced and radically
minimized technical failures.2
These changes introduced the “human era” and the safety efforts shifted focus to
human factors. With the introduction of crew resource management (CRM) and line
oriented flight training (LOFT), massive efforts were made to try to control human
error. However, human error continued as a frequent factor in safety violations.
From the early 1990s on it was recognized that individuals can’t be seen as “stand
alone” within the operational context.3 The causal sequence of accidents—from
organizational factors, to local workplace conditions, to individual unsafe acts, to
failed defenses and negative outcomes—has to be taken into consideration; those
elements reveal the contributing factors of potential failures.
For any accident, the focus must be on the organizational factors, for example
the safety culture of an organization and what local conditions could have shaped or
provoked it.4


By taking a closer look at what causes an accident it is not possible to simply point
out one factor which is responsible. Accidents require a chain of enabling factors
where each together has to be present to cause an accident, but individually has
insufficient power to breach the system’s defenses. This underlines the complex and
well protected aviation system where single point failures are rarely consequential
because they are protected by various defenses such as regulations, training and
technology.5
By looking at Fig. 5.2 it should become clear that operational errors or
disregarded procedures are delayed effects which have been missed by managers,
workplace conditions or organizational processes. Those errors will continue to
emerge until organizational or workplace conditions are changed towards better
safety awareness. Operational failures act as triggers of latent conditions where
people in complex systems make mistakes or violate procedures for reasons that
usually go beyond the scope of individual psychology.6 Those latent conditions
doze in the system and become apparent once the defenses of the system are
breached.7
Other contributing factors to an organizational accident are active failures.
These failures are errors or violations committed by front line personnel such as
ground staff, pilots, and air traffic controllers which have a direct impact on the
safety of the aviation system and which may result in a damaging outcome.8
Summarizing the cause of an organizational accident reveals the different stages
which are required to generate an accident. Most of the latent conditions start with
the decision makers and organizational processes which are often subject to human


biases and limitations, such as budgets and politics. Internal processes must be
established to detect those threats and neutralize them. The decisions made by line
management may lead to inadequate training, violation of maximum working hours
or protective workplace measures.
The result will generate a workforce which has inadequate knowledge and skills
or is not able to apply the right operating procedures. The consequence of
generating errors and violations will lead to active failures and potential accidents
which, in total, reflect a poor safety culture.9

5.3

Regulation of Safety Management Systems

With amendment 30 to ICAO Annex 6 Part I, the International Civil Aviation
Organization introduced a new paragraph, 3.3 which addresses safety management,
and under paragraphs 3.3.4–3.3.8 set standards which require that states, as part of
their safety program, have to ensure that an air operator implements an acceptable
safety management system (SMS).10

5.3.1

ICAO Regulations11

Relevant for the implementation of an SMS are the standards and recommended
practices (SARP). They can be found in the ICAO annexes 6, 11, 14 and the ICAO
Safety Management Manual. Furthermore, ICAO Annex 19, 1st edition is applicable from the 14th November 2013. All of the safety management provisions in


Annex 19, 1st edition, were transferred or duplicated from safety management
provisions previously contained in the six different Annexes, with the exception of:
1. The Safety Management System (SMS) framework now applies to organizations
responsible for the type design and manufacture of aircraft;
2. The four components of the State Safety Program (SSP) framework are elevated
to the status of Standard in Chapter 3;
3. The State Safety Oversight is applicable to the oversight of all product and
service providers; and
4. The Safety Data Collection Analysis and Exchange (Chapter 5) and the Legal
Guidance for the Protection of Safety Information from Safety Data collection
and processing systems (Attachment B) complement the SSP.12
ICAO regulations are categorized into primary and secondary ICAOlaw.13Primary ICAO-law is everything that is part of the Convention of Chicago,14
which was signed by Switzerland on the 6th February 1947 and has been effective
since the 4th April 1947.
The secondary ICAO-law consists of 18 annexes containing standards,
recommended practices, procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS), and
Regional Supplementary Procedures (SUPPS).15
In contrast to the EU (EASA) the ICAO has no sovereign powers. Normally, the
application of ICAO regulations and annexes in Swiss law is implemented through
the adoption or amendment of an already existing statute or the creation of a new
one. The recently added article 6a LFG explicitly foresees the possibility of a direct
application of the ICAO annexes.16 This reference to and delegation of a piece of
legislation established by organizations which are not subject to international law
(i.e. ICAO, and JAA) can be problematic (see 3.2.4). Nevertheless, as long as the
treaty’s clauses are self-executing, no transformation into national law is required.
US-Courts decided that article 5, 8, 15, 20, 24, 29, 32, 33 and 36 CHI are directly
applicable. There has been no decision, so far, about whether the annexes of the
convention are directly applicable.17
Even though aviation is internationally regulated with the ICAO regulations on the
one side and with EU laws, based on the EASA regulations on the other side, there
are still Civil Aviation authorities in each country. Their purpose is not only to
transfer these regulations into national law, but also to identify country specific
amendments.
As Switzerland is not part of the EU, regulations have to be accepted in a special
procedure which is determined in the bilateral agreement on air transportation with
the European Community (Luftverkehrsabkommen, LVA20). For an
EU-Regulation to be transformed into Swiss law there has to be a decision by the
aviation committee which, if accepted, becomes the equivalent to a bilateral treaty.
The Swiss Federal Counsel or, in special cases, the Swiss Parliament21 need to then
give their consent. In this context, it is important that every amendment needs
approval again. 22
So far no European regulation concerning the introduction of SMS exists.
However, the EASA stated its intention to translate the SMS related provisions in
ICAO Annex 6 into upcoming rulemaking proposals.23 Until now, only the
EU-OPS 1.037 exists which defines an “accident prevention and flight safety
program” consisting of a risk awareness system, reporting system, evaluation of
accident information and a flight data monitoring program for airplanes heavier
than 27,000 kg MCTOM.
Furthermore, every organization needs to have a person accountable for managing the program.
Importance and Objectives of a Safety Management
System

Given the complexity of the aviation system with its rapidly changing operational
environment and demanding authority regulations, the air operators are facing
increased pressure on the financial as well as operational side. These underlying
characteristics of complexity and rapid change in the aviation industry demand a
systematic approach towards managing safety.
The key to success is a safety management system, which can be described as a
set of processes or components that combine operational and technical systems with
financial and human resource management. Those processes are present in every
activity of an air operator, airport or an approved maintenance organization. It is a
methodical approach to safety with the focus on goal setting and a clear definition
of accountability throughout the operator’s organization.
An SMS aims at continuous improvement to the overall level of safety while
measuring performance, analyzing processes and becoming an integral part of the
company’s business management activities and corporate culture.29
The implementation of an SMS requires processes which allow the control of
safety risks, and introduces the concept of an acceptable level of safety.
In order to describe the basic components of a safety management system, a look
at the structured elements is necessary. These elements are presented as the “four
pillars” and illustrate the principles and basic concepts of the SMS structure. The
structured elements must exist and have to be robustly executed in order to make
the SMS effective.30

The policy of an air operator’s management is a written expression of the company’s
intentions, philosophy and commitment to safety. It generally describes the
accountabilities and responsibilities of the personnel involved. Furthermore, it
focuses on achieving safety goals or safety performance targets, with the
corresponding measures to achieve those targets.31 The policy should focus on the
27

 

continuous improvement of the overall level of safety through the management of
safety risks and establishment of clear standards for behavior. The commitment of
senior management is the key success indicator for a successful safety management
system. Therefore, it must be a high level statement signed by senior management
and should provide assistance to everyone who is in direct or indirect contact with
safety performance. Fundamentally, it should also provide a specific roadmap so that
all safety management activities are efficient and shared among the company.32

The risk management process is the fundamental task to control risks at an
acceptable level and can be seen as the key task in safety management. The process
consists of identifying hazards, assessing the risks, developing mitigation measures,
controlling safety risks and monitoring the effects of safety actions. The underlying
plan of risk management is that the severity and likelihood of an event occurring
can be minimized. Risk management is a basis for decision making concerning how
to handle occurrences which affect aviation safety. In addition, it is a basis for
incident assessments, their implications and evaluating the results. A key to success
is constant and direct communication throughout the organization.33
A detailed understanding of operational systems is a prerequisite for risk management. These systems encompass the organizational structures, processes and
procedures, people, equipment, and facilities which have a contribution to the
organization’s productivity. An in depth systems engineering analysis will emphasize the interactions between hardware such as aircraft, software, people and the
environment. It points out weaknesses in the identification of hazards and
associated risks.34

Safety assurance shall mean all planned and systematic actions necessary to afford adequate confidence that a product, a service, an organization or a functional system achieves
acceptable or tolerable safety35

Having policies, processes, measures, assessments and controls in place, an operator has to put emphasis to the following processes to assure the highest level of
safety.36 Aviation organizations must develop safety performance monitoring and
measurement processes in order to maintain the means to validate the safety

Fundamentals and Structure of Safety Management Systems in Aviation

53

performance of their operations in relation to the safety policy, and to confirm the
efficiency of safety risk management. Safety performance and safety monitoring
must have structured reporting processes where it is clear which types of operational behavior are acceptable or unacceptable.
It must be explicitly defined under which conditions immunity from disciplinary
action has to be considered. The aviation service provider must constantly apply the
management of change and develop and maintain formal processes to identify
deviations within the operational environment which may have an effect on the
established processes and services. Operational changes have to be implemented
and documented to modify the safety risk controls that are no longer needed or
effective. Management must constantly identify causes of deviations in safety
standards and procedures of the SMS and work on continuous improvement of
the SMS with regular safety audits and management reviews to eliminate such
deviations.37
An important instrument for safety assurance is the Safety Review Board (SRB).
The SRB should normally comprise the Accountable Executive, Safety Manager
and different managers from their corresponding field of duty (ground ops, flight
ops, etc.). The Safety Review Board should meet monthly in order to assess the
submitted safety reports of the employees. This review and assessment process
should deliver monthly reports which can be processed internally and also be
forwarded to aviation authorities.
These reports should include SMS performance indicators which illustrate
quantifiable attributes from analyzed events. The performance indicators should
have concentrated expressiveness, the ability to allow internal and external
comparisons, and should point out developments and tendencies. Safety performance indicators on their own only provide stimulating information for further
analysis. Therefore, securing comparability is essential for internal and external
analysis. Safety performance indicators are generally data based expressions of the
frequency of occurrence of some events, incidents or reports. There is no single
safety performance indicator that is appropriate for all organizations.
The indicators chosen should correspond to the relevant safety goals. Examples
of possible safety indicators are as follows:
 Number of in-flight incidents per 1,000 flight hours/cycles
 Number of findings per audit (or other measurable audit performance criteria)
 Number of hazard/safety reports received, etc.
 Number of incidents in daily operations



Pillar Four: Safety Promotion


clearly defined arrangements to ensure that the work achieved by the Safety
Manager and committees (e.g. SAG or other), as well as line management, is
transmitted to all those involved in the relevant activities (Fig. 5.3). The lessons
learned must be communicated effectively in order to promote system
achievements.

to move from an initial project to a continuous risk assessment. There are several
internal and external solutions about how to achieve this goal either by assigning
internal resources or employing a consultant.
It is difficult to calculate specific costs and benefits arising from risk management as long as no failure that could have been prevented by proper risk management materializes. Costs for implementing and for the continuous improvement of
risk management play an important role. Depending on the size, complexity of the
company, the business framework and industry the company is in, risk assessments
will affect financial resources to a greater or lesser extent. As a part of this chapter
an assessment of time spent for setting up a proper risk management in a company
and for a long term development of risk management has been provided. From the
number of working days spent on different functional levels of management, costs
can be estimated individually for companies. This is a new concept and should help
managers to better financially plan their risk management process.

2. Duties
 Monitoring and optimization of the risk management process
 Ongoing mitigation of the key risks of the sample company
 Ensuring adequate insurance coverage
3. Requirements
 Social and interpersonal skills
 Independent, accurate and structured way of working
 Flexible and resilient, solution-oriented
 Optimization focus
 Openness to new ideas and changes
 Loyal and discreet
 Planning and organizational ability
 Expertise in Risk Management
 Basic training in Risk Management
 Interdisciplinary understanding
 Networked thinking
 Organizational strengths
 Willingness to participate in ongoing training in Risk Management
4. Key Activities
 Risk analysis:
– Preparation of annual risk analysis (as part of the annual operational risk
analysis) for submission to the CEO and BoD


Operational Risk Management as an
Integrated Part of Safety Management


Operational risk management is a central part of the safety management system and
has to be further outlined. This chapter provides an overview of:
 Hazard Identification
 Operational Safety Risks


Hazard Identification

The identification of hazards is the fundamental activity within safety management.
Each risk analysis starts with the hazard identification process. It aims at identifying
any condition with the potential to cause injury to personnel, damage to equipment
or structures, loss of material, or reduction of the ability to perform a prescribed
function. In particular, this also contains any conditions that could contribute to the
release of an un-airworthy aircraft or to the operation of aircraft in an unsafe
manner. Hazard identification is performed in order to identify the hazards in the
organizational systems and the operational environment of companies and to assist
in controlling these hazards.1 Such a process can be implemented through internal
reporting instruments like flight data monitoring including the constant monitoring
of the processes defined for specific operations and business processes. For safe
operations, it is vital that an ongoing assessment of the operational functions and
processes is performed to apply changes which contribute to the proactive management of safety. The core processes in safety management are regularly safety
 

assessments which immediately track trends and changes in order to provide
essential information for maintaining the system’s safety health.2
The traditional approach of air operators towards hazard identification only
focuses on the monitoring and assessment of operational areas. These areas include
trend analysis and safety relevant occurrences of aircraft operation. The method is
called the reactive approach because operational data is used to understand the
environment, equipment status and cultural milieu in order to identify the hazard.
Just being reactive and only responding to incidents and accidents, is a clear
indicator of deficiencies in the aviation safety system of a company.3
With modern hazard identification the focus is directed towards process analysis
finding weaknesses as well as identifying potential failures. The overall goal is to
fix or eliminate those weaknesses before they turn into an incident or even an
accident.4 This new thinking is a proactive approach to the identification of hazards
and risk analysis. Upon being able to understand the hazards and associated risks
within daily operations, a company must work on minimizing hazardous conditions
and respond proactively. This can be achieved by analyzing processes, conditions
and working environment to improve the overall level of safety. Those processes
and conditions include departments like training, budgeting, planning, marketing,
procedures and organizational factors that might have a contribution to operational
accidents. Here it becomes obvious that hazard identification should be regarded as
a core-business function and not as an extra management task.
It is a fundamental step for a company to transform from a reactive culture to a
proactive reporting culture where everybody actively tries to address safety related
issues before they turn into catastrophic events.5 The way to safety superiority is
through the additional predictive approach where confidential reporting systems
monitor real time flight data and provide information which might identify future
problems. The focus is on emerging safety risks and how to intervene in order to
minimize the risks to an acceptable level.6
A combination of reactive, proactive and predictive methods will lead to effective hazard identification and will provide fundamental information for risk
management.


Given that a hazard may involve any situation or condition that has the potential to
cause adverse consequences, the scope for hazards in aviation is widespread.
The following list provides some examples for hazards:
2


Operational Risk Management as an Integrated Part of Safety Management Systems

Hazard Identification

Evaluate the
seriousness of the
consequences of a
potential hazard
Analysis
Priorization
Documentation of
results

Accept Risk

Identify the
hazards to
equipment,
property,
personnel and the
organization

Take action to
reduce the risk to
an acceptable level


Risk Control and
Monitoring

Reports
 Master Risk List
If necessary
adaption of Risk
Assessment

Equipment or task design
Procedures and operating practices
Communication
Human factors
Organizational factors
Work environment factors
Operational risk management is the identification, analysis and elimination of
those hazards, as well as the subsequent risks, that threaten the viability of an
organization.
The first goal of Risk Management is to avoid hazards. The proactive identification and control of all major hazards is fundamental. Successful operations depend
on the effectiveness of the hazard management program. Figure 7.1 illustrates the
risk management process7:
The following example should provide clarification to help understand the
difference between corporate risk management and the safety management system.
Four pilots found a business aviation company and want to operate their aircraft
on a commercial basis. According to state obligations they are required to show
efficient Risk Management during their first annual financial statement for the
acquisition of the aircraft. In parallel they acquire their AOC, where they are
required to implement a safety management system for the company, with a strong
focus on the operational and organizational sides.
The four pilots hold an equal share in the company, but the CFO has single
signature rights because they decided to speed up the signature process and trust
their partner. This fact illustrates a very common mistake in corporate governance
and completely neglects Risk Management.

 

Management Implications


The aviation business is one of the harshest business environments managers can
think of. Tight profit margins, frequent business cycles, governmental regulation,
safety requirements and the direct interdependency to the world economy are just a
few factors which cause immense headaches for top management. Maneuvering a
company through this environment requires the right management strategies and
skills.
This chapter provides an overview of:
 Corporate Governance
 The Internal Control System with its connection to different standards
 The balancing act between production and protection

8.1

Corporate Governance

Corporate Governance touches different areas within a company. It basically
defines the processes, structures and the framework for the leadership, management
and monitoring of companies.1
Successful companies have classically similar characteristics which set them
apart from less successful companies. The key areas comprise an effective, competent board of directors, with clearly defined responsibilities, and a skilled CEO who
is eligible to run the business with integrity and great vigor. Additionally, the
business concept has to be executed effectively and profitably utilizing the right

resources in order to compete in the market environment and to meet the customers’
expectations in an outstanding way. Moreover, prosperous companies apply the
right tools and systems which ensure the efficient implementation of processes and
compliance with applicable laws and regulations.2
There are three main objectives which are addressed by Corporate Governance:
1. Establishing, with regard to content, the timely preparation and distribution of
information about all important business processes within the company to the
management across all decision levels.
2. Ensuring transparency of all essential processes, decisions and results in order
to illustrate a clear picture for all involved stakeholders.
3. The control by the advisory board ensures that companies do not act against
laws or ethical codes, and that all decisions made by the shareholders are
implemented.
Figure 8.1 illustrates the main objectives of Corporate Governance.
Corporate Governance in the aviation industry is not specifically the primary
objective when looking at the composition of the board. Authorities like EASA,
BAZL, etc. have positioned structural rules and regulations for air transportation
which have to be followed by AOC holders. These regulations already contain
guidelines concerning transparency, control and information systems which target
managerial leadership.3

8.2

Internal Control System

Overall Risk Management in the context of corporate governance has to be distinguished from the focused operational risk management in the aviation business. It is
therefore helpful to speak of “Corporate Risk Management” if the overall approach
in the sense of corporate governance is intended. A part of corporate risk management is the Internal Control System (ICS). The ICS is one of the key management
instruments and is defined by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission (COSO) as a process affected by an organization’s structure, work and authority flows, people and management information systems,
designed to help the organization accomplish specific goals or objectives.4
The challenge for the aviation industry is to combine corporate governance risk
management with the safety management system. The SMS includes the process of
hazard identification (HAZID) based on the standards and recommended practices
(SARPS) of ICAO. The experience of successful aviation companies leads to the
conclusion that the SMS should be based on the corporate risk management without
touching the aspects of internal controlling, as visualized in Fig. 8.2.5

Objectives

Management Information
System
Provision of information to
management

Transparency
Provision of information to
Shareholders/ and
Stakeholders

Control
Revision of essential
business activities

Function

Early detection

Obligation to report/
Financial accounting

Cooperation between
Supervisory Board and
Management Board

Instruments

Risk Management

Investor Relations


Hazard
Identification
Safety Management System
Fatigue Risk
Management
System
Corporate Risk Management

Research by the I. FPM Centre for Corporate Governance, at the Institute for
Leadership and Human Resources Management at the University of St. Gallen
showed that one of the main mistakes made by the Management Board was
insufficient or non-existent Risk Management. That is why risk management
assumes a key significance in the area of corporate governance.6 The ten most
common and important mistakes and deficiencies at board level can be listed as
follows:


Challenges and Deficiencies at Board Level7

1. Below satisfactory qualifications of the Board of Directors (BoD), especially the function of the Chairperson in connection with the absence of
the non-executive board members, and incorrect structure of the board
2. Poor preparation and lack of overview by board members
3. Conflicting interests influence board decisions due to inadequate internal
regulations
4. Lack of clear strategies and strategy control
5. Non-existent or inefficient risk management, especially regarding liquidity planning or regulatory compliance
6. Very reactive rather than proactive approach by the Board of Directors to
changes, due to the low frequency of board meetings
7. Unsatisfactory provision of information and information evaluation, in
particular due to insufficient or delayed reporting to the Board of
Directors.
8. Poor or delayed decision making, especially with incomplete decision
documents
9. Lack of cooperation between Executive Management and Board of
Directors, in particular lack of clearly defined responsibilities
10. No existing evaluation of Executive Management and Board Members;
inefficient Managers and Board Members are replaced too late


Balancing Act, Production vs. Protection

Coming to the question of production and protection, the management constantly
faces a “management dilemma” (Fig. 8.3).
The commercially competitive environment puts a lot of pressure on the overall
cost basis. Frequently, being safe is perceived as an expensive, intangible and never
ending obligation imposed by the aviation authorities that has unclear returns on
investment.
There is an inherent conflict between protection and production goals. On the
one hand, the overall protection (safety) must be kept at a high level to avoid any
catastrophic events but, on the other hand, production goals must also be at a high
standard to avoid bankruptcy. Whilst the productive aspects are commonly well
understood and their related processes are comparatively transparent, the protective
functions are far more diverse and more subtle.8 Since production generates the
resources which are vital for protection, its needs will always be prioritized within
an organization. Air operators are always driven by production goals, where the
Protection

Bankruptcy

Production

Catastrophe

primary objective is the timely and efficient delivery of services. This objective
often contradicts operational safety considerations, because the need to meet a
schedule and land at a particular airport at a particular time often has priority,
regardless of weather conditions or airport limitations.9 Often such sacrifices have
no negative effects or generate no negative outcomes and can become a common
practice in daily business and routine work practices. Unfortunately, becoming used
to reduced system safety margins provides an increasingly vulnerable combination
of accident-causing factors.10
But looking at the consequences, it must be recognized that accidents, incidents
or even single safety violations can put the lives of staff in danger and might
damage customer relationships, not to mention the damage to the reputation or
the morale within the company. The balancing act within safety management is
about finding the perfect balance between the production of services and products
and the protection of human, financial and technical resources.
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) (2009), pp. 14–17.
Reason (2004), p. 6.

10


Practical Implications of Risk and Safety
Management

Research Findings

The analysis of the survey shows that almost half of the respondents are from
organizations with a workforce greater than 500 employees where Risk Management is already implemented. Small firms with less than 50 employees are underrepresented at only 15 %. However, smaller firms are still a very interesting
segment to study as most of the regulations have been developed specifically for
larger organizations, and small organizations are increasingly struggling with the
implementation and monitoring of regulatory compliant management systems.


The functions of the respondents within the organizations are all, at least, middle
to top management. Furthermore, at least 85 % of the respondents hold an academic
degree.
An interesting finding is that approximately 60 % of the respondents perform a
double function within their organizations, meaning they are responsible for a
minimum of two different areas within their organization.
Only 41 % of organizations surveyed employ a risk manager in their Corporate
Risk Management. This leads to the assumption that in some organizations, Risk
Management is still a side function which does not require a dedicated position
within the organization and is thus not properly executed.
Usually, executive management, supported by a specific risk manager, would be
involved in the Corporate Risk Management, and would bear the overall responsibility and authority for the risk management process. According to the survey, only
60 % of the organizations involve executive management within their Corporate
Risk Management. In addition, only 33 % have a specific risk management committee which should jointly evaluate and mitigate the risks for the organization.
Furthermore, the low percentage of 22 % regarding the involvement of an audit
committee indicates that corporate risk management is not regularly monitored for
effectiveness or regulatory compliance.
The individual identification of risks by every employee within an organization
is crucial for the exposure of safety risks. Still, 30 % of the respondents have never
conducted a survey with all the employees to reveal inherent safety risks within
their organization and processes. Instead, the survey showed that the organizations
make use of various types of data/information sources for the Safety Management
System, e.g. operational factors, flight data and air safety reports.
When taking a closer look at the connection between Corporate Risk Management and other management systems, the majority of the organizations link Corporate Risk Management with their Safety Management System. Nearly half of the
respondents identify a link with the Quality Management System. Only 22 % have a
connection to the Internal Control System. There is still a minority of 19 % of the
organizations which use their Risk Management as a stand-alone process without
any further connection to other management systems.
Even though the aforementioned analysis is not ideal from a solid risk management process perspective, 89 % of the respondents classify their operational safety
level within a range of fair to excellent, with 60 % classifying their operational
safety level as excellent.
In order to reach this excellence and to effectively manage and improve their
Safety Management System, organizations are dependent on industry specific
information and guidance. Most of the organizations follow the Civil Aviation
Authority guidelines and/or directly the ICAO SMS framework which shows that
best industry practices and regulatory parameters are the most commonly used form
of obtaining information for the improvement of the Safety Management System.
Forty-four percent of the organizations use seminars as a source of information,
whereas only 25 % rely on the expertise of consultants. This importance of seminars
contributes to the fact that sharing of safety relevant information within the industry
is a common approach to improving each organization’s SMS.


In addition, most of the organizations make use of internally developed tools or
buy software to help them with the implementation, monitoring and running of their
SMS. Therefore, Safety Policy, with the safety management manual, is the least
challenging module to implement. In contrast, 42.3 % regard the safety risk management module as the most challenging. This is in line with recent discussions during
industry forums and workshops. Operators increasingly face issues to identify and
properly manage risks within their organizational and operational processes and
environment. Approximately 20 % are not challenged by the implementation of
any of the four modules. On average, the respondents estimate their total spending
on Safety and Risk Management at around 2.4 % of their total revenues.

The majority of respondents are from large organizations or parts of an organization
with more than 500 employees where Risk Management is implemented. Around
70 % of the respondents are from organizations larger than 250 employees, which
shows that the majority of the answers are based on more complex organizational
structures and organizational challenges. Small organizations are only represented
by 15 % of the respondents (Fig. 9.1).
The educational level shows a high academic concentration with around 85 % of
respondents at least with an undergraduate or postgraduate degree (Fig. 9.2).
The respondents of the survey have the following functions which are spread
from middle management to top management.
 Captain
 2  Safety Management Systems Manager
 CEO
 Chairman of the Board
 Chief Engineer
 CO
 Commander Flying Training
 CSO
 Deputy CEO
 Director, Corporate Safety Policy, Planning and SMS Audits
 Head of Division Safety Development and Support
 Head of Safety
 Maintenance Manager
 Managing Director
 Member of the Board
 National Air Navigation Services Provider
 Project Coordinator, Aircraft Maintenance Engineer and SMS Instructor
 Safety and Environmental Compliance Manager
 Safety Manager
 Safety Projects Coordinator
 Senior Director
 Type Rating Instructor
 Regarding the operational situation, how would you personally classify your current
safety level within your company?

Fig. 9.7 Where do you get your information from in order to improve your Safety Management
System?

Fig. 9.8 Which strategic objectives for Risk Management and Safety Management do you have?

The survey also shows that the different organizations make use of various types
of data/information sources for the Safety Management System (Fig. 9.9).
The majority of the organizations use self-developed tools or buy software to
help them with the implementation, monitoring and running of the SMS. Only 8 out
of 27 make use of external consultants to help them with the implementation. This
leads to an interesting question about the market availability of the appropriate
consulting services concerning Safety Management (Fig. 9.10).
The following question revealed interesting facts about the implementation of
the different SMS modules. It demonstrates that the Safety Policy module is the
easiest to implement, which shows that writing a static manual and policy was not a


real challenge during the implementation process for most of the respondents. What
is quite interesting though is that approximately 20 % were not challenged by the
implementation of any module. As anticipated by the researchers, the most challenging module, with 42.3 %, was the Safety Risk Management module as it
requires connecting many different interfaces within the organization (Fig. 9.11).
The survey further reveals that the majority of the organizations follow either
Civil Aviation Authority guidelines and/or directly the ICAO SMS framework
(Fig. 9.12).


Air traffic is a relatively safe means of transport compared to others. One of the
reasons for this fact is the way air traffic has made safety a priority in its
operations.1
As mentioned earlier, all productive entities2 in civil3 aviation are obliged to set
up a Safety Management System, and the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) or other accepted bodies4 recommend or try to enforce them.
Interestingly, the same ways and means concerning how to implement such a
Safety Management System (SMS) seems to apply to all entities.5 Without doubt,
one could call the material at hand a standard way of introducing a SMS.

This chapter takes a closer look at whether this approach is supportive in
promoting and enhancing safety in aviation.
Analyzing the recommended method reveals that a risk-based approach6 is
promoted. It is therefore correct to ask which of the three entities—aircraft
operators, air traffic service providers, and operators of airports7—are risk bearers.
To this end a more formal definition of risk and eventual safety is unavoidable.
Most people are conscious of the fact that in today’s world and even more so in the
air transport system, risks are manifold.8 This, however, is amplified, because many
parts of the system have become privatized firms where the variety of risks has
vastly increased (see Appendix: Types of Risk).
In accordance with aviation practice, the remainder of this chapter concentrates
on the risk of an aircraft accident as the ultimate hazard on a flight from A to
B. While it is, in principle, irrelevant whether a flight is under visual or instrument
flight rules,9 the remainder of the text treats only the more instructive case of a flight
under instrument flight rules. This is because an additional entity besides aircraft
operator and airport come into play, namely the air navigation service provider and
its full service range. For any flight of an aircraft operator, an airport is most often
necessary.10

Security is often mentioned in the same breath as flight safety. Nevertheless,
security risks will not be addressed in this chapter, because security breaches
concerning unlawful acts would have to be treated differently. The reason is that
at least two11 parties with their proper strategies are involved. This article assumes
stochastic processes on the one side and a possible strategy on the other. Security
risks would ask for a game theoretic approach. It remains an open question,
however, whether a game theoretic approach would have to be taken into consideration for the situation where a group of risk bearers inside a firm are confronted with
An SMS is a system to assure
the safe operation of aircraft through effective management of safety risk. This system is designed
to continuously improve safety by identifying hazards, collecting and analysing data and continuously assessing safety risks. The SMS seeks to proactively contain or mitigate risks before they
result in aviation accidents and incidents. It is a system that is commensurate with the
organization’s regulatory obligations and safety goals.”

Maintenance organizations are thought to be part of the operator and service providers while
manufacturer’s of aircraft declare the reliability of their products to the aircraft operators; training
organizations exposed to safety risks would most probably belong to aircraft operators.

organizational decisions, whereby the strategy from the group differs from the one
management has imposed.12

The Notion of Risk

A generally valid definition of risk is difficult.13 In the remainder of this text the
focus is on operational safety risks14 and the suggested method for operational risk
assessments is a quantitative risk analysis15 (QRA). A first reason for this is because
the three considered entities—aircraft operators, air navigation service providers
and airports—are organizations,16 and therefore base their choices on rationality.17
The second one is the number of important enough realizations with uncertain
outcomes, namely flights or movements. A third one is the practitioner’s and
engineer’s view that numbers warrant a certain rigor and allow for comparisons.
In most definitions of risk, an adverse or negative outcome of a realization
appears to generate a damage or loss.18
The occurrence of such an outcome, however, is not certain; but, there is a
likelihood that goes with it.19 For certain categories of risk takers, there exists some
control over space and time, of where and when this adverse outcome may take
place. If the outcome is negative, the question arises why risks are being taken at all.
This is answered by the utility theory.20
Regarding quantitative risk analysis the statement, “A risk is deemed to be large
if either the loss is severe, if the probability is high or both together. Similarly, a risk
is deemed to be small if the loss is small, if the probability is low or both together,”
is broadly accepted.
12
So called “organisational factors” see also Gephart, Maanen, and Oberlechner (2012), 
Some of the different risk categories are intertwined with safety. For example, availability is
connected to business risk while reliability is connected to safety risk, while in addition the two are
analytically related.
15
Often also probabilistic risk analysis PRA, which evaluates and quantifies risks associated with
complex systems.
Made up of groups of individuals—see also Sage and White (1980), p. 440 $C.
17
Even more so because all three should be high reliability organisations, notwithstanding the fact
of bounded rationality Risk is the expected value of loss. 19
Given the number of realizations, this product allows an entity to decide,
whether the risks taken are acceptable and commensurate with the ones expected
or planned for a certain type of IFR operation. The function also supports the
statement on quantitative risk assessment above.
R has to be distinguished from the total risk taken. The total risk taken is
expressed in the risk curve23 based on the cumulative likelihood of all the scenarios.

10.2.1 Scenarios
For simplicity24 the following general categories of scenarios are developed as an
example (Fig. 10.1).
The occurrences in Table 10.1 are the prominent scenarios thought to lead to
aircraft accidents. To define the set of triplets for R the si are to be complemented by
21


Take-oﬀ

En-route

Approach
99
Landing


Scenario
Phases of flightc
Take-off
En-route
Approach
Landing
Unknown

Occurrencea k
Collisions
Obstacle Terrain

Aircraft


In-flight damageb

Any flight is thought to evolve along the above phases.25 It is obvious that
more detailed phases of flight and a finer occurrence scheme lead to a polynomial
increase in scenarios.


Empirical values for pi, the likelihood of a scenario for a given type of operation are
often known from experience. Where empirical data is missing and a stationary
process is identified, a Bayesian approach is usually suggested to estimate the
likelihood.26 Bayesian27 theory is also used when the likelihood of an occurrence
for a sequence of events leading to an aircraft accident is to be estimated. The most
general start then is the computation of the conditional probability to estimate the
likelihood for the scenario. The frequency of such a scenario is then quantified as a
product of probability terms of the individual events in this sequence.
Operational reality can be more closely modelled in state space. A Markov process would then
describe the changes from one phase of flight to any another. For example, if a landing is aborted
and a missed approach is initiated without passing through an en-route phase. 
The advantage of a Bayesian approach comes into full effect when no
occurrences are available. A prior assumption, often based on expert judgment,29
is then gradually modified whenever empirical data from operation is available.
Such an evidence-based approach is of considerable practical relevance, especially
if a new technology or new procedure is introduced.

10.2.2.1 Hazards
In conjunction with the above set of risks a corresponding set of hazards30 is
introduced.

A general definition of an accident is an event that is unintended; causes untoward
damage to persons, objects or the environment, and affects the functioning of the
system.32 Aircraft accidents are safety occurrences.33
According to ICAO three main categories of such safety occurrence are
distinguished:
 Accidents and serious incidents
 Incidents and
 Other safety occurrences.
Aircraft accidents, for the most part, are thoroughly analyzed and extensively
documented.34 Although results are ex post and the official publication of the
29
a
condition or an object with the potential to cause death, injuries to personnel, damage to equipment
or structures, loss of material, or reduction of the ability to perform a prescribed function. For the
purpose of aviation safety risk management, the term hazard should be focused on those conditions
which could cause or contribute to unsafe operation of aircraft or aviation safety-related equipment, products and services.”
31
Conscious of the fact that all loss of property or life may eventually turn into a monetary or
financial risk, hazards may be insured. In this case the insurance premium maps the insurable
safety risk onto a cost dimension, which is to be compared to the average risk above.


reports often has a substantial time lag,35 the range of damage and loss xi incurred
for a given type of operation is accessible in detail.
Given this empirical data, it is thus also possible to quantify xi in probabilistic
terms for a particular scenario.
Figures 10.2 and 10.3 show the available statistical information of empirical
evidence of xi, namely the loss of life. The loss is the logarithmic36 number of fatalities
in aircraft accidents from 1st Jan 2000 to 23rd Aug 2013 for occurrences with one
fatality or more. The graph shows the losses grouped as a function of the weight class
(see Table 10.2) of the aircraft. The data is publicly accessible from the “Aviation
Safety Network Database” (Courtesy of H. Ranter). The sample size is 808.
The median, indicating expected loss, clearly rises37 as the weight of the aircraft
increases and so does the variability. Damage, in monetary terms is somewhat more
intricate to calculate. Part of the reason lies within ICAO reporting schemes.
However, accident reports and the service age of the aircraft involved will allow
for reasonable estimations.
ICAO defines an aircraft accident (see Appendix: Accident Definitions) rather
extensively.38 This has an impact on the variance and the expected value of the
probability distributions for xi. It does make sense to assume a central tendency in
the distribution (see Appendix: Joint Probability Distribution of Aircraft Weight
and Total Fatalities). Still a bias towards the lower end of damage and loss cannot

Lower losses in class 5 may be due to limited occurrences available, indicated also by the
reduced surface of the boxplot, which is a function of sample size (width proportional to the
square-roots of the number of observations in the groups).
ICAO’s accidents therefore do not necessarily always translate into catastrophes.



be ruled out. The ICAO’s definition in Appendix: Accident Definitions with the
taxonomy under ECCAIRS, does not concur when using simple count data. The
ECCAIRS suggested method is towards using categories, an approach leading to
Kaplan and Garrick’s multidimensional approach.39
The distinction between final accidents and ones where a sequence of events
leads to an adverse outcome is of importance when estimating the likelihood of an
aircraft accident. These are occurrences such as a sudden structural failure or
extreme weather phenomena (in Table 10.1). However, aircraft accidents most
often do develop in sequences of mishaps and are thus called system accidents.40
When applying conditional probabilities to these sequences, some caution has to be
exercised.41 This is because a tight coupling renders prediction of the system
reaction difficult. This leads to the question whether the air transport system is
tightly or loosely coupled. It is tightly coupled in certain microscopic42 aspects
39
“System accidents involve the unanticipated interaction of multiple failures.” System accidents start with the failure of a part and are characterized by the progression of the
accident involving multiple failures and those failures interacting in ways that are not anticipated
by nor are they comprehensible to the designers and properly trained operators

On a per flight basis.
40

which depend on the phase of flight. Interactions occur on the flight deck and with
air traffic control43 or on the ground with airport facilities. Albeit, the system
operators are aware of the fact that they have the obligation to provide enough
resources in order to assure a running system,44 there may be times such as peakhours on an international hub airport, where resources become constrained. General
statements on tight or loose coupling (Marais et al., 2004, p. 3) should be avoided.
In any case, the scenarios (Table 10.1) would allow for a qualified decision on
whether the application of conditional probabilities to estimate likelihood is
justified. The transport system on a macroscopic45 level is inherently
decentralized.46 Therefore, tight coupling is not really an issue. However, recent
developments in air traffic management47 have shown efforts in concentration and
centralization, and this will cause an increase in complexity.48 Large international
hubs are just another example on the airport entity side.
ndividuals and organizations bear risks in aviation. But not all individuals are free
to choose the risks they want to bear. Therefore, it makes sense to classify risks in
different categories. From now on, neither societal nor individual risk will be the
focus; instead, the emphasis will be on group risk.
Persons exposed to risk are risk bearers and possible victims. They may be a part
of the system in the sense of carrying out a crucial function. A classification is
necessary because the appreciation of risk is different regarding voluntary and
involuntary exposure. Voluntariness in risk exposure is, for all but the fourth
party (see Fig. 10.4), of varying importance. There are always personal choices
involved. According to Slovic,49 the perceived benefit of air transport technologies
is more than four times higher than the perceived risk. Furthermore, individuals
tend to be more positive towards taking risks if they expose themselves voluntarily.
Perrow suggests a suitable categorization.50
Examples of a trade-off between voluntary exposure and involuntary exposure
are aircrews. They have chosen to work for an airline and by earning an income the
43

Part of air traffic services (ATS).

Although the system is tightly coupled on certain aspects like cockpit interactions, flight deck
and aircraft or ATC-aircraft, but in general stays a decentralised loosely coupled overall system



Operators of the
system


Non-operating
personnel or
system users

Passengers or the users of
the system and those who
exercise no control of its
operation.



Innocent bystanders

Persons on the ground
where an accident happens.



Future generations

Persons confronted with the
future consequences of the
accident.

Risk exposure
voluntary

Characteristics

Involuntary

Category

Fig. 10.4 Categories of risk bearers . Risk exposure (4th column heading):
qualitatively, for in depth view 

risk exposure is only partially voluntary. For the population living or working near
airports51 that are located close to metropolitan regions, it is difficult to argue that
they could simply choose to live elsewhere. So to them the risk is almost completely
involuntary.
The first party risk takers are the ones that staff the three entities that run the air
transport system. This group, depending on which entity they belong to, is thus the
one that influences or controls, to a varying degree, the triplets determining risk
R. This group is obviously heterogeneous across and within the three entities,
i.e. implying operation and maintenance personnel or managerial staff. Although
the cited sources claim that the overall responsibility lies with the top management
position, it is understood that decisions are taken on all levels in the organizations.
It is a matter of on-going research what the responsibilities and decisional powers
are that have an impact on safety.
It is, however, clear from the description in Table 10.2 that the possibilities to
manage risk are with the group of first party risk bearers.52 The focus of interest for
the remainder of the chapter is therefore on them.

10.5

Managing Risk

In managing risk it is generally understood that the risk should be reduced to an
acceptable level. Clearly, the operation of flying an aircraft from A to B is
hazardous.
51
Returning to the quantitative risk analysis the question to be answered is which
of the first party risk bearers, grouped by entity, has the capacity to manage the risk
of an aircraft accident and to what extent?
Therefore, managing risks means an entity must be in a capacity to influence the
triplet defined above—namely scenario, probability and consequences.
For the sake of argument, the interaction between an aircraft and air traffic
control53 under IFR is taken as an example.
While the phase of flight is a planned act of the flight crew, entering a new flight
phase under IFR needs a request and is entered only with clearance from air traffic
control. The reverse is only exceptionally true. The flight crew requests a change to
a new flight phase as part of the planned flight from A to B. Due to efficiency, air
traffic control is in the position to deny the flight crew’s request. Naturally, given
the constraint of the aircraft’s fuel reserves, the granting of the request cannot be
postponed indefinitely.
The semaphored interaction by air traffic control assures that separation is
established (note part of the set under “Collision”) in (Table 10.1).
Now the likelihood that a certain scenario takes place is, in this case, governed
by the flight deck and air traffic control decisions. However, it can be shown that under
certain assumptions the layers of influences (see Fig. 10.5) diminish from top to
bottom (for a more formal explanation, see Appendix: Decision Layer and Influence).
If the en-route flight phase is taken as an example, four outcomes (as in
Table 10.3) become possible.


Provided as part of air navigation services or more precisely air traffic services. From ICAO
objectives of the air traffic services shall be to: prevent collisions
between aircraft; prevent collisions between aircraft on the manoeuvring area and obstructions
on that area; expedite and maintain an orderly flow of air traffic; provide advice and
information useful for the safe and efficient conduct of flights; notify appropriate organizations
regarding aircraft in need of search and rescue aid, and assist such organizations as required.”

Leading to additional fuel burn and unwanted delay.


Except if an airport tower or other air navigation facilities were damaged by an aircraft.


Airports may add to damage and loss when exposing assets like buildings.

The opposite holds for an airport. It has little to no influence over the flight
phases and limited impact on the likelihood of most of the scenarios, but could
suffer damage and loss of its own assets as a result of an aircraft accident on its
premises. The only measure to reduce risk in operations is to reduce the maximum
weight and size of aircraft it can accommodate.59 That obviously correlates with the
officially published airport reference code (Table 10.4).60
Not only air transportation, but also the services industry in general is known for
producing their goods between service provider and client in a convoluted way.
Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to approach the processes in a structured way. The
likelihood of a scenario may serve as an example. The different entities (Fig. 10.4)
contribute to the final likelihood. The resulting probability density that allows an
estimate of the likelihood is the convolution of the individual ones.


So far, little has been said about the accepted bodies and regulatory authorities.
The question can be posed whether a regulatory authority, typically a civil
aviation authority, has any safety risks to bear. As they indirectly intend to limit
the risk exposure of the four categories in Table 10.2 that obviously gives any
regulation a high influence on Risk Management. In the context of an adverse
scenario a regulation would turn out to be a sort of a prohibition,61 reducing the
likelihood of occurrence to virtually nil. To avoid these scenarios, conservative
regulation of system design and operation has to be imposed. Often, an identified
worst-case scenario or a worst credible accident serves as a guideline.62
Such an approach, however, given the different variables and probabilities
involved, will turn out to be sub-optimal. Moreover, the identification of worstcases often implies subjectivity63 and arbitrariness in the definition of the scenarios.

In an aviation transport system value chain it can be argued whether every entity
has to take Risk Management into consideration in its safety activities. Instead, it
is proposed first to analyze where the risk bearers are located.
There is evidence that the aircraft operators bear the final risks. Although
other entities like airports and air navigation service providers are part of a
hazardous operation, they have a limited impact on the exposure to safety risks.
They suffer limited impact from safety risks.
It is therefore necessary for the aircraft operator to have a risk-based Safety
Management System. Risk assessment is part of Risk Management and should
only be performed by the most influential entity in collaboration with the others
that support the addressed flight operation. The necessity to assess the risk of
flights seems best to remain with the operators. This is because it appears to be
the only entity that predetermines the scenarios, can estimate convoluted
likelihoods, and control incurred damages and losses when deciding on the
type of aircraft used. The influence of the other entities on likelihood, damage
and loss are unevenly allocated.
When taking a macroscopic65 view of an air transport operation, it is
recommended to leave the risk-based safety management with the aircraft
operator.
Furthermore, when employing quantitative risk assessment, the lead for
assessing safety should be with the aircraft operator in conjunction with the
other two entities—air navigation service providers and airports. The operator is
the one to ultimately decide whether to fly through a given airspace or take off
and land at a specific airport and the one entity that must ask the questions “What
can happen? How likely it is that it will happen? And if it does happen, what are
the consequences?”
While setting the likelihood66 as a standard value makes sense for the air
navigation service provider, it is doubtful whether it will also be applicable for
every type of flight operation. For the average risk67 of a realization it must be
compatible with the aircraft operator’s way of conducting its flight operation.
Given different acceptable risks and the considerable variability in the

consequences, the likelihood for a given type of flight operation68 cannot be a
standard value.
Different risk management activities in general increase the complexity of a
system and lead to the creation of incompatibilities.
This is especially true in air transport, where we see an increase in system
complexity; thus, care must be taken that the creation of incompatibilities is
avoided, not only globally but also locally.

Manifestation
- Consumer behavior
- Policy changes
- Regulation changes
- Marketing
- Loan management
- Fraud
- Capital management
- Products, projects, design
- Labor force problems
- Political demonstrations
- Property
- Parts delivery
- Joint venture partners problems with management
- Legal
- Default of technical infrastructure
- Fire
- Explosions
- Flood
- Natural catastrophes
- Activities of green activists
- Change in regulations
- Unintended pollution
- Public perception
Accident
An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which, in the case of a
manned aircraft, takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with
the intention of flight until such a time as all such persons have disembarked, or in
the case of an unmanned aircraft, takes place between the time the aircraft is ready
to move with the purpose of flight until such a time as it comes to rest at the end of
the flight and the primary propulsion system is shut down, in which:
a person is fatally or seriously injured as a result of:
– being in the aircraft, or
– direct contact with any part of the aircraft, including parts which have
become detached from the aircraft, or
– direct exposure to jet blast, except when the injuries are from natural causes,
self-inflicted or inflicted by other persons, or when the injuries are to
stowaways hiding outside the areas normally available to the passengers
and crew; or
 the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure which:
– adversely affects the structural strength, performance or flight characteristics
of the aircraft, and
– would normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component, except for engine failure or damage, when the damage is limited to a
single engine, (including its cowlings or accessories), to propellers, wing
tips, antennas, probes, vanes, tires, brakes, wheels, fairings, panels, landing
gear doors, windscreens, the aircraft skin (such as small dents or puncture
holes), or for minor damages to main rotor blades, tail rotor blades, landing
gear, and those resulting from hail or bird strike (including holes in the
radom); or
the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.

Accidents (no incidents, hijackings or sabotage)
Fatalities (at least one among the plane’s occupants)
Aircraft model certified to carry 12 passengers or more
Aircraft damaged beyond repair
Data from 1st January 2000 until 23rd August 2013

The Relevance of Fatigue in Aviation

Fatigue is caused by sleep deprivation. Sleep is a basic human need. When you are
thirsty you drink; when you are hungry you eat. And when you are tired, only sleep
will prevent fatigue and its almost inevitable and, sometimes, extremely serious
consequences. For the aviation industry, the question how far fatigue poses a risk of
accident for crews, patients,1 passengers, the public at large and, in the end, also
companies needs to be addressed.
Fatigue does not pose a risk in itself, but is rather a physiological condition
caused by a number of factors. The following are contributing factors:
 Individual sleep need, including existing cumulative sleep debt,
 Sleep quantity,
 Sleep quality,
 Circadian rhythm,
 Length of current and preceding duty periods,
 Exposure of the body to the environment (e.g. solar radiation, light, noise,
vibrations, heat, changes in air pressure),
 Absolute and relative physical and mental effort,
 General physiological constitution, including previous medical conditions,
 Nutrition,
 Stress (in both professional and private life) and,
 Where appropriate, time zone adjustments (long-haul flights).



It is the impact of fatigue or over-tiredness on a person’s performance, and the
resulting error frequency and severity that pose potential critical risks. These risks
need to be managed.

Fatigue: A Measurable Factor?
First, it is necessary to establish the scientific definition of fatigue. The ICAO
defines fatigue as follows:
A physiological state of reduced mental or physical performance capability resulting from
sleep loss or extended wakefulness, circadian phase, or workload (mental and/or physical
activity) that can impair a crew member’s alertness and ability to safely operate an aircraft
or perform safety-related duties.2

As far as measurability is concerned, two different approaches need to be taken
into consideration: subjective and objective fatigue.
The challenge posed by subjective measurement values is their comparability
and applicability with regard to objective physiological states. In practice, for
subjective evaluations the following scales are used, which enable physiological
conclusions to be drawn:
 Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS),3,4
 Visual Analogue Scale to Evaluate Fatigue Severity (VAS-F)5
 Samn Perelli Scale (SPS)6
In order to correlate the findings with the above-mentioned scales, study
participants are generally also asked to keep a sleep logbook.
Objective measurement results relating to fatigue and sleep can be achieved by
means of invasive polysomnography together with electroencephalograms (EEG),
electro-oculography or body temperature measurement, or by non-invasive
actigraphy. In practice, however, only actigraphy is generally used in an operational
setting. The actigraphs currently on the market, usually in the form of a wristwatchlike device, have the necessary sensitivity and specificity. Thanks to their
non-invasive application, the measurement results are also less influenced by the
device itself, as it is generally not perceived as a “foreign body”.

Fatigue: An Overestimated Safety Risk?
Fatigue is without doubt one of the most frequently underestimated risks connected
with error making.7 This is particularly due to the fact that without appropriate

training, people find it difficult to accurately assess their own level of fatigue. Even
as working time progresses, they continue to subjectively assess their fatigue level
as low, although from an objective point of view it has increased.8,9 Correspondingly, the potential risk is also underestimated.
During long-haul flights, particularly long periods of wakefulness and little sleep
give rise to acute sleep debt, of which the crew member is more conscious, and can
thus more easily assess the fatigue-related risk. However, with regular, shorter
overall duty periods, crew members build up, over a period of days, a cumulative
sleep debt, of which they are generally much less aware. Assuming that an
individual requires 8 h of sleep a day, but only obtains 7 h each night over a period
of a working week (Monday to Friday), at the end of this period he has accumulated
a sleep debt of 5 h. As a result, the operational risk can increase to the same degree
as if he had slept normally for the first four working days but had had just 3–4 h of
sleep during the night from Thursday to Friday.
On long-haul flights, when the circadian body clock is desynchronized due to
changing time zones, this gives rise to so-called jet lag. Common symptoms are
fatigue due to sleep disruption, exhaustion and a feeling of being unwell, as well as
confusion and digestion problems.
Without special training, crew members often underestimate the impact of sleep
debt and the ensuing risks. Already a sleep debt of 3 h is comparable to an increased
level of alcohol in the blood that would preclude the person concerned from driving
a car, and certainly from flying an airplane.
This also applies to situations where, for example, crew members sleep for 10 h
but then have prolonged periods of wakefulness with sleep restrictions. Despite the
preceding lengthy period of sleep, after the 12th hour of being awake, the average
performance degrades, and by the 16th hour the cognitive performance deficit is
comparable to that of a person with a blood alcohol concentration of approx.
0.04 %.10 Being awake for more than 20 consecutive hours impairs reaction
times to a level similar to those found with a blood alcohol level of 0.1 %.11,12
Already with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.06–0.09 % there is a 1.36–3.3
times higher risk of an accident (in the 95 % interval).13
Sleep deprivation and prolonged periods of wakefulness have immediate
effects.14,15
 Up to 50 % degradation in reaction speed
 Reduced memory

Impaired vigilance
Reduced hand–eye coordination
Reduced situation awareness
Impaired decision-making ability
Increased micro sleeps (momentarily nodding off)
Prolonged sleep inertia immediately after waking up
Increased irritableness
Increased apathy
Moreover, the long-term health effects of chronic fatigue, such as cardiovascular
diseases, diabetes and metabolic disorders, should also be taken into consideration.
 Fatigue: An Individual or Systemic Factor in Accident
Causation?
Although fatigue is an individual physiological reaction on the part of crew
members, systemically promoting or inhibiting framework conditions should also
be taken into consideration. Ultimately, a fatigue-related incident or even a fatiguerelated accident is the end of a causal chain of events, or “error trajectory”, where
the fatigue risk was insufficiently considered at various points in the process, or
where the mitigation strategies were not effective. Naturally, the chicken and egg
question can be posed in this respect—that is, whether the cause was purely an
individual error resulting from fatigue, or whether a system had facilitated it.
In the field of aviation, fatigue is a risk that, like all other risks related to flight
operations, must be addressed within the framework of a Safety Management
System (SMS). As it is a complex risk, a fatigue-specific sub-SMS, known as a
Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS), is necessary.
However, Risk Management does not come to an end on completion of the last
flight of the day/shift. In accordance with the duty of care, the journey home after
work by a potentially overtired employee should also be taken into consideration.16




 General identification of fatigue risks within the scope of Rega’s flight
operations and other framework conditions, such as the duty roster model and
its potential impact on safety
 Personal interviews with pilots relating to fatigue and sleeping habits
 Investigation and analysis of sleep and fatigue relating to pilots and other crew
members, both during and outside official duty periods
 Support in the development of effective mitigation strategies, e.g. by designing
new duty roster models and introducing a company and operation specific
Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS).
Rega carried out several sub-studies on fixed-wing and helicopter missions,
relating to each of the two operations—helicopter emergency medical services
(HEMS) and airplane emergency medical services (AEMS)—separately.
These studies also aimed at increasing staff awareness of the risks relating to
lack of sleep, prolonged periods of wakefulness and the ensuing physiological and
psychological effects.
The results of the studies were also intended to form a base for establishing a
Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS).


Basically, all flight crew members were made available to participate in the studies
and were guaranteed absolute anonymity. In order to measure the individual fatigue
levels objectively, each crew member was given a “ReadiBand” actigraph.
ReadiBand is a highly sensitive wristwatch-like device that accurately monitors
fatigue and sleep by means of movement and acceleration sensors. Preliminary
studies, with the aim to validate the design, showed that this actigraph provides
92 % of the accuracy of laboratory sleep testing without using invasive and complex
polysomnography methods. The device is waterproof and indestructible. The only
function it has for the wearer is that it indicates the time, so it can be worn instead of a
watch. The study participants were then required to permanently wear an actigraph
for a period of two weeks (helicopter crews) or 3–4 weeks (fixed-wing crews).
In addition to the actigraphs, all study participants kept a personal logbook in
which they recorded both the subjective level of fatigue and any accompanying
circumstances, which was then correlated with the objective data. To this end, the
crew members evaluated their level of alertness in accordance with the Samn–
Parelli scale (SPS),17 both before and after periods of sleep and naps. They also
noted down the quality of their sleep and their subjective sleep need.
In order to assess the effects of sleep debt and circadian influences on performance, the study participants were required to carry out so-called psychomotor
vigilance tasks (PVT), in the form of reaction tests, at predefined times before,
during and after flights for the entire duration of the study. These involved standard

tests, developed by the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,18 which were
performed on an electronic Palm Pilot organizer provided to each study participant.
During the study, each participant was contacted twice by telephone by the
independent research institute. The purpose was, on the one hand, to ensure that the
data collection was functioning properly and, on the other, to ask participants about
social or other environmental factors that could affect the quantity and quality of
their sleep in order to integrate these findings into the study.
After this data collection phase, the actigraphs and logbooks, as well as the PVT
test devices, were directly sent by the study participants to the independent research
institute so that the data could be read and evaluated. In order to also be able to
compare the results at an international level, the Fatigue Avoidance and Scheduling
Tool (FAST®) was used, which is also used by the US Department of Defense, the
US Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
FAST® was specially developed for the aviation industry and allows continuous
fatigue risk monitoring, even when high volumes of data are involved. The tool
produced a precise sleeping profile for each of the participating crew members
(Fig. 11.1). This sleeping profile had been influenced by such factors as activities,
time zone changes, rest periods and sleep periods in the aircraft, and was also
documented by the study participants in their personal logbook.
The effects of sleep quantity and quality on the study participants’ individual
performance in their daily work was evaluated by means of the Sleep, Activity,
Fatigue & Task Effectiveness (SAFTE™) model (Fig. 11.2). To achieve this,
besides fundamental factors such as circadian rhythm, sleep history and time
spent awake, SAFTE used a host of other data delivered by the actigraph
(ReadiBand) (Fig. 11.3). This data was then compared with the personal logbooks
and conclusions were drawn relating to increased sleep need and sleep debt, as well
as successfully and unsuccessfully applied mitigation strategies.
After collecting and evaluating the data, the next step was to assess the risk. For
this purpose, the mission risk was portrayed in the form of key risk indicators (KRI),
by means of matrix evaluation. Here, the overall risk is indicated on a 5  5 risk
matrix, with the likelihood of occurrence shown on the Y-axis and the mission safety
that is compromised by fatigue on the X axis. The following risk rating applies:
 Low risk: KRI 1–4
 Medium risk: KRI 5–11
 High risk: KRI 12–25


In individual situations, flight crew members were found to be suffering from
higher levels of fatigue than allowed by Rega’s own safety standard. It was
discovered that without the corresponding training and experience, the crew
members were not able to optimally apply and evaluate the risk factor of fatigue
in their work planning.
After training, the crews showed an increased awareness of fatigue as a risk
factor. However, the fact that crew members with sleep debt were not able to
accurately assess their own level of fatigue was also confirmed.19
The following individual mitigation strategies were used by the flight crews in
accordance with their training:
 Food
 Planned in-flight rest (bunk/cabin) in accordance with the crew members’
circadian rhythms and potentially fatiguing mission phases
 Changed in-flight rest structure
 Caffeine
 Increased use of SOPs
 Fatigue taken into consideration during briefings
 Flight crew member (FCM) notified of fatigue
 Increased use of automation
 Enhanced use of crew resource management (CRM)

Fatigue Causes & Consequences
Individual
Factors

Job Factors

Fatigue

Human
Performance

Health

Roster

Duration
Rotation


Predictability


Time zones


Work
Factors

Operational
Performance

Individual
Factors

Timing

Traits
e.g. health
medications
chronotype
Lifestyle
e.g. sleep
environment
recreation
second job
domestic
situation

Operational
Performance

Health

FATIGUE

Human
Performance

Incidents

Insurance
Cardiovascular
Absenteeism
Gastrointestinal

Mood
Communication

Productivity
Well-being
Costs

Memory
Morale

Workload

Vigilance

Job design

Problem solving

Opportunity
for naps

Risk taking

Environment

Reaction time

Retention
Reputation




Targeted advance sleeping at the Rega Centre before early-start duties21
Naps in the afternoon before starting a night duty22
Naps during ground patient transfers at airports
Use of cockpit iPad
Use of ear plugs and sleep masks
Use of own sleeping bags and pillows
Thanks to these comprehensive studies and the clear commitment on the part of
the management to establish fatigue as an officially recognized safety risk in the
corporate culture, it was possible to achieve a change in mentality, as well as
conscious consideration of this factor when drawing up the duty rosters (Fig. 11.4).
At an operational level, the following risk factors were taken into account:
 Duty hours
 Cumulative duty
 Basic maximum flight duty period
 Night, early and late duties

Duty extensions
Duty extensions due to in-flight rest
Positioning and travelling
Extension of on-ground break
Pilot-in-command discretion
Airport standby
Standby other than airport
Basic rest
Basic rest-reduced rest
Extended and recovery rest
Time zone crossing
To allow for the above-mentioned risks, among other things, the following
operational mitigation strategies were implemented:
 Predicting the expected level of fatigue during the mission phases by means of
FAST and, where necessary, scheduling additional crew members
 Activating the crew as early as possible
 Pre-positioning with night stop ideally in the same time zone
 Planning missions in accordance with circadian principles, in particular avoiding
starts and landings during the window of circadian low (WOCL)
In this way, it was possible to significantly reduce the mission risk on 11 ultralong-haul missions. Predicting the fatigue levels played a significant role in this
respect. Here, the FAST program provides a reliable calculation base, as the studies
showed:
These findings indicate that, for this mission, FAST is a reasonably accurate tool for
predicting mission effectiveness.23

Initially, a high risk was registered in three cases, and a medium risk in eight
cases. In all cases in which initially a high overall risk (Key Risk Indicator
KRI > 11) existed, this dropped to a substantially reduced medium residual risk
after applying operational mitigation strategies. Thus, on all the ultra-long-haul
flights there was only a moderate residual risk.
In the sphere of helicopter flights, it was found that overall the fatigue factor was
well managed by Rega thanks to the existing operational framework conditions
(corporate culture, OM, SOP). It emerged, that night missions in particular are very
tiring for flight crew members. On the Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS),24 the
value for night flights increases by one point per mission flown. Moreover, when
using night vision goggles (NVG), the impact is doubled.25 Of additional relevance
was the length of the mission. The reasons for this are cumulative and acute sleep
debt, physiologically unfavorable circadian night phases, short phases between
waking up and taking off in the helicopter, as well as the considerable strain and

exertion of performing a night mission. In this connection, with primary missions,
the type of mission (winch operation, search flight, etc.) is not important. Equally,
no significant differences were found between the fatigue experienced by pilots and
by HEMS crew members (HCM).
Nevertheless, the existing mitigation strategies could be implemented even more
effectively. For example, although the 3-h break specified in the Operations Manual
(OM) was evaluated as being beneficial, it was not used nearly as much as it could
have been. The 6-h break, also provided for in the OM (temporary closure of
helicopter base) with the aim of limiting working at night, was also not always
correctly implemented by the crews. After closing the base, crew members continued
to perform technical and administrative tasks, and stopped only to sleep after these
had been completed. This resulted in an unplanned and avoidable sleep deficit.
The existing rest and sleeping facilities at the helicopter bases were rated as
very good.
The comparative study of the duty time model, 24 h versus 48 h, examined the
levels of fatigue and performance of the flight crews in the course of 76 periods of
duty with a total of 226 missions using the 48 h model, and 138 duties with a total of
366 missions using the 24-h model. No advantages relating to operational safety
could be identified in connection with the 24-h model,26 thus reconfirming the
results of the preceding HEMS main study (Fig. 11.5).

 was introduced states of fatigue that posed a potential safety risk were
identified. It was only after collating data and analyzing and evaluating the risks
relating to both fixed-wing and helicopter operations that it was possible to develop
specific mitigation strategies. Raising awareness among flight crew members relating to fatigue as an operational risk factor has resulted in it now being managed in a
professional, scientifically based and responsible manner.
However, there is no such thing as an error-free mission; every operator will
repeatedly make mistakes. Whilst errors of a purely technical nature can be
increasingly reduced by continually making improvements, cases of human error
are on the rise—not least due to the increasingly complex technology and the
ensuing increasingly complex: man–machine interface. Added to this is the fact
that in recent years the legally prescribed Crew Resource Management (CRM)
training has resulted in creating greater awareness of human error, as well as
delivering effective identification methods and mitigation strategies. Consequently,
in absolute terms, more errors caused by human factors are being identified,
communicated and avoided. Also, in the case of fatigue, the aim is to teach
employees to recognize the human factors and the resulting error trajectories in
good time, and to try to avoid them and, subsequently, their consequences. For this
purpose, Rega has drawn up a Rega Fatigue Guide for use by the employees.
At an operational level, Rega has now integrated the fatigue factor into the
overall risk assessment for missions. Here, it is possible to predict the risk of fatigue
and where necessary make adjustments to avoid it occurring (Sect. 11.3). To this
end, the FAST prediction provides a reliable basis on which to calculate the lowest
mission risk relating to various operational scenarios in terms of both time and staff.
Apart from compromising safety, sleep debt and fatigue also lead to a drop in
productivity and with it, unnecessarily high costs for the company concerned.27

11.2.5 Discussion
A Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS) must form an integral part of a
company’s Safety Management System (SMS).
In addition to identifying risks, a FRMS assesses risks and introduces effective
countermeasures at the earliest possible point of the error trajectory. Solely focusing on flight operations would be insufficient, with the result that the fatigue-related
risk for the operator would be underestimated. Even the best and most rested pilots
cannot totally counteract technical errors made by fatigued maintenance staff.
Forgotten lock pins, nuts tightened at a too high or too low torque or even the
classic error of leaving bolts or tool parts inside critical aircraft components are all
potential causes of serious malfunctions which are physiologically related due to
cognitive impairment on the part of overtired maintenance and service staff
(Fig. 11.7).
27

The identified potential error development trajectories must be continually
re-evaluated within the framework of dynamic Risk Management and necessary
modifications made to the mitigation strategies, in order to counteract the development of potentially severe errors as early as possible. This principle is not FRMSspecific and applies to the framework of quality management in general and safety
management in particular. It is also not necessary to establish FRMS as a parallel
structure to SMS. On the contrary, FRMS is optimally applied when fatigue on the
part of staff flows into the company SMS as an error occurrence source (Fig. 11.6).
Overall safety largely depends on the frequency and quality of such re-evaluations
(Fig. 11.8).
Explicit reference should be made to the considerable risk of a single action bias.
This is an infinite management process. Anyone for whom this seems rather
expensive is recommended to calculate the potential financial, reputational and
legal costs and consequences of a technical incident (e.g. exceeding the rotor mast
moment of a helicopter, hydraulic failure, FOD in the engine) or even worse, of an
accident.
The results of the Rega studies are based on particular operations and are
therefore company-specific. Simply transferring the detailed results to other
operators would be inappropriate and potentially dangerous. The results relating
to one company could lull another company into a feeling of false safety. For this
reason, Rega refrains from publishing any specific measurement results.
All flight operators must comply with the appropriate national and supranational
laws, as well as international legal provisions, such as the Chicago Convention
(ICAO annexes), EU law, European Rules for Air Operations (Commission Regulation (EU) No. 965/2012), Swiss Code of Obligations (OR), Luftfahrtgesetz (LFG)
(Swiss aviation law), Arbeitsgesetz (ArG) (Swiss labour law), Luftfahrtverordnung
(LFV) (Swiss aviation directive), Verordnung für Betriebsregeln im
gewerbsmässigen Luftverkehr (VBR I) (ordinance governing the operation of
aircraft for commercial air transport) and the Verordnung über die Verkehrsregeln
für Luftfahrzeuge (VVR) (ordinance governing the operating regulations for commercial civil aviation). All the above-mentioned regulations are, concerning individual points, relevant to FRMS. Added to this are collective or company
employment agreements. Companies that apply the principles of good corporate
governance also take account of circumstances that are not governed by law, but
that are of benefit to their company and employees. This includes not permitting
staff suffering from fatigue to drive home themselves or scheduling more rest time
than prescribed by law. Rega offers its employees rest facilities at all its bases that
are designed based on the latest sleep research findings. This not only provides
flight crew members with sleeping accommodation, but also enables high quality
sleep. At the company headquarters and at all of the helicopter bases, there are
several apartments that can be used at short notice and free of charge. It also pays
for travel by public transport, so that fatigued crew members do not have to drive
themselves home. Furthermore, Rega has introduced so-called “compensation
time”, in addition to the statutory rest time. Compensation time, approximately the
same length as the official rest time, aims to ensure that flight crews are well rested



In the past, legislators have taken a regulatory approach to fatigue prevention by
regulating the duration of work and non-work periods. In the sphere of aviation, this
is known in many countries as “flight time limitations and rest requirements”.
However, it is not always clear which legislation actually applies.
For example, if a Swiss pilot-in-command with a FOCA license flies together
with an Austrian co-pilot with a EASA license in an aircraft registered in the USA
on behalf of an Egyptian aviation company over Russian territory, the question
arises as to exactly which regulations apply. In Appendix 2 to ICAO Annex 6, the
ICAO defines the organization and contents of the Operations Manual (OM) and
under Para. 2.1.2, part (a) explicitly requires flight and rest times to be specified
within the framework of Fatigue Risk Management. In Europe, the framework
conditions that are prescribed by law are specific to the operator and are defined by
the operator in accordance with Appendix 1 to EU-OPS 1.1045, Para. A.6.1 part. j,
in the General/Basic section of the Operations Manual (OM-A). The competent
supervisory authority is responsible for approving the OM to ensure compliance
with the applicable laws and regulations. The AOC is decisive for the flight and rest
times. In the above-mentioned hypothetical case, this was issued by Egypt. As far as
the approval of the OM is concerned, Egypt lies outside the EASA’s jurisdiction.
However, as Egypt has signed the Montreal Convention, and thus recognizes the
ICAO, it is bound by the international ICAO guidelines. Nevertheless, these only
regulate the organization of the OM, but not the length of the flight and rest times
themselves. In the above example, the organization of the OM could, and most
probably would, comply with the statutory standards. However, hypothetically, it is
possible that a flight time of 18 h without a break could be approved by the Egyptian
authorities. Thus a flight time for both pilots of 15 h without a break would be
formally legalized, despite the fact that this would be imprudent due to the risk of
fatigue.


Generally speaking, legislators and authorities have a high interest in promoting
safety. However, they are equally interested in their regulations being monitored in
a simple and straightforward way. Until now, legislators have addressed the risk of
fatigue simply by applying blanket regulations relating to maximum working times
and minimum number of resting times and breaks, despite the fact that in
Switzerland alone, working time regulations in the sphere of aviation is a very
complex topic.28 Such limits were primarily intended to protect the employee.
Legislators are faced with the challenge of satisfying the needs of all operators as
well as all situations, both predictable and unpredictable. This “one size fits all”
28


philosophy only functions when minimum safety standards, including all possible
deviations, can be precisely defined or, in the absence of potential concrete identification of risks for all the companies, when the safety buffer is large enough. In
many technical areas, this kind of so-called “hard rule” can be adopted and applied
in an efficient manner (cf. EASA Certification Specifications, European Standards).
However, it is difficult to understand why a model that is successful and efficient
for technical matters should be used to respond to the potential risk-related
consequences of multifarious human behavior. It must be possible to implement
laws and directives in such a meaningful and safe way that they neither compromise
safety nor place a burden on the market through overregulation or even bureaucracy. This calls to mind the former Commission Regulation (EEC) Nr. 1677/88 –
the so-called “Cucumber Regulation”—where the EU regulators in Brussels even
specified the curvature of a cucumber as a quality standard. This standard has now
been rescinded as the legislators recognized, in this particular case, management by
direction and control was not expedient (Fig. 11.9).


The counterpart of the rigid flight and rest time regulation (hard rule) is a resultoriented risk management process. This allows fatigue-related risks to be regularly
identified and assessed. It also enables operational processes to be actively adapted
and mitigation strategies to be drawn up by all flight operators that are required to
implement them. Here the legislator determines the safety goals, which must then
be achieved by the operators through their in-house risk management process.
The acceptable level of safety expresses the safety goals of an oversight authority, an
operator, or a services provider. From the perspective of the relationship between oversight
authorities and operators/services providers, it provides the minimum safety objective
(s) acceptable to the oversight authority to be achieved by the operators/services providers
while conducting their core business functions.29

A result-oriented process with a safety objective, including a goal for the level of
safety, also promotes readiness for technical innovation. Innovations make it possible to achieve or even exceed an existing safety level more easily and cheaply in the
future. For decades, the speed limit for trucks has been 80 km/h. This hard rule is
based on the braking performance of a truck fitted with old-style drum brakes and
without ABS, as was the norm several decades ago. When it was introduced, this
maximum speed was without doubt appropriate, as it prevented the braking distance
of the truck, including in adverse driving conditions, from being exceeded and thus
protected other road users. In the meantime, however, most trucks are equipped with
modern disc brakes and ABS. Their braking capacity is significantly better than the
originally prescribed distance. However, this development has taken a very long
time, because there has been very little incentive for the manufacturers to improve
the system. Theoretically, it would be more sensible to define the maximum stopping
distance, as well as other safety and environmental criteria. If the required safety
29
level is complied with, it could lead to a model-related maximum speed of 90 or
100 km/h.
In the sphere of aviation, a result-oriented process would result in hitherto
unidentified risks being actively reduced by means of legal regulations with an
acceptable safety level and active, comprehensive Risk Management by the operator. The active Fatigue Risk Management process would also identify potential
risks that are not immediately associated with fatigue. This would achieve a
positive collateral effect. Thus the claim, “Safety is worthwhile” is true on two
counts. Furthermore, by means of innovation management, the corporate culture
could be decisively improved regarding safety.
Consequently, it is difficult to understand why, for example, a pan-European
hard rule specifies a maximum duty time of 12 h. At some helicopter bases, 12 h is
already too long because by this time, the crew members have long been showing
significant cognitive impairment due to fatigue, resulting from, for instance, the
number and length of the missions performed at unfavorable circadian times. On
the other hand, other helicopter bases might not have carried out any missions at all,
with the result that the crew members are by no means suffering from fatigue. In
remote regions, it can happen that only four or five missions are flown within a
period of 96 h. In normal circumstances that would be equivalent to around one
mission per day. With such a low frequency, the flight crew members are unlikely to
suffer from fatigue due to an uninterrupted period of duty, and a prescribed safety
level can be complied with. In fact, a frequent change of flight staff would result in a
loss of mission experience which would instead have a negative impact on flight
safety. In addition, the crew members would be exposed to greater risk on the
roads—which is also completely unnecessary, as such a rigid measure would not
increase flight safety anyway (Fig. 11.10).
Legislators should encourage companies to assess the risk of fatigue actively and
at their own initiative. However, this will only happen when operators are given an
incentive to continually optimize their processes while at the same time
maintaining or improving safety.

It is quite clear that some companies need to change their way of thinking and to
realize that simply completing checklists and complying with legal provisions do
not guarantee safe flight operations. Even if the laws are complied with, serious
accidents involving fatalities are still also possible, as unfortunate cases all over the
world continually demonstrate. In the end, independent of laws, ordinances and
standards, it must be in the interests of each and every flight operator to perform its
services with the highest possible level of safety, and to successfully and proactively reduce the high potential risk posed by fatigue. Naturally, this applies to all
other risks, too.
This responsibility—vis-à-vis passengers, crew members and maintenance
staff—must be actively assumed. The supposed “passing on” or “delegation” of
this fundamental responsibility to a third party, including the legislator
(Sect. 11.3.1), is not in line with good corporate governance. A clear, on-going
commitment by the company management to introducing a proactive, companywide safety culture is absolutely essential. Even the best strategy can be rendered
ineffective by a misguided corporate culture that neglects safety. This falls in line
with the management maxim, “Culture eats strategy for breakfast” (Peter Drucker).
A non-punitive corporate culture is necessary if companies want their employees
to deal with their own mistakes openly and honestly, and to discuss them internally
in order to prevent the same mistakes being made again by other crews. People
make mistakes, and instead of sparking off a destructive tirade of “name–blame–
shame–claim”, accidents and, even more, incidents can be regarded as valuable,
constructive elements for a learning and increasingly intelligent organization.
Fatigue can be triggered by a host of factors over which employees do not
always have an influence, such as lack of sleep through night noise. It is of key
importance that staff develop an awareness of the risks associated with fatigue, and
are correspondingly prepared to address and manage the problem proactively for
themselves and their work colleagues.30 For this purpose,
operators should publish possible countermeasures in the form of a guide (e.g.
Rega Fatigue Guide).
This also includes the fact that flight crew members should, at any time, be able
to report in as “unfit to fly” before commencing a period of duty, without being
subjected to reproach, criticism or “interrogation”. It also comprises employees
notifying each other of impairments, such as those due to fatigue in a constructive
manner, in order to avoid safety risks and to seek suitable resolutions in good time.
Naturally, it should not be possible for this kind of system to be misused, such as by
giving overall, systematic, non-punitive absolution for willfully or grossly negligent violations. Investigations carried out by the European Helicopter Safety Team
(EHEST) show that only 16 % of all unsafe acts concerned violations or willful
disregard of rules and regulations. The vast majority (84 %) were the result of
human error. Of these errors, 72 % were attributable to fatigue (judgment and
decision-making errors 60 %; perceptual errors 12 %).31 The remaining errors were
skill-based (28 %), which could only partly be attributed to fatigue because the skill
impairment was already evident beforehand. Instead, in the case of qualification
errors, fatigue has a detrimental effect on the compensation mechanisms
(Fig. 11.11).
The European Helicopter Safety Team (EHEST) also discovered that regarding
the causes of unsafe acts, the current condition of the individual (60 %) coupled
with environmental factors (17 %) made up a large proportion of the factors that
were influenced by fatigue (77 %). In addition, general personnel factors (23 %)
played an important role (Fig. 11.12).
Circadian aspects should be taken into consideration already at the mission
planning stage and, for example with elective missions, be avoided from the very
outset by wisely choosing the best time to begin the period of duty (early or late).
Poor mission planning is the greatest supervisory problem, rating even higher than
faulty supervision,32 which is why this topic is examined in more detail under
Sect. 11.3.3.
Even the best safety culture needs explicit programs. In the field of aviation, the
Safety Management System (SMS) is the core program for company-wide safety.
This should integrate the Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS) as an essential
process relating to fatigue-related risks. With the FRMS, just as with the SMS, a
holistic approach is desirable, and maintenance and service should also be taken
into account alongside flight operations (Sect. 11.2.5).
At the end of a shift, operators can offer flight staff members suffering from
fatigue various options for returning home safely.33 This could be, for example, the

Unsafe Acts

Errors (84%)

Violations (16%)

Judgement & DecisionMaking Errors (60%)

Skill-Based Errors (28%)

Perceptual Errors (12%)

Fig. 11.11 Causes of unsafe acts (EHEST, 2008). Source: Own illustration

Preconditions
for Unsafe Acts

Condition of Individuals
(60%)

Personnel Factors
(23%)

Environmental Factors
(17%)



possibility of having a sleep before going home, or of the company paying for travel
by public transport.
In the long-term, companies can also profit from more alert staff by providing
health-promoting facilities and activities for its staff, such as ergonomically
designed workplaces, healthy food, subsidized fitness club memberships, company
sports teams and general health education.


When implementing a company-wide safety culture and the related programs,
managers or supervisors form an integrative link between the senior management
and the employees. Corporate culture is the sum of the behavior, habits, shared
history and anticipated future within a company. Supervisors are correspondingly



important, as they act as role models who uphold the corporate culture in the
various spheres on a day-to-day basis. It is essential that they are aware of the
key role they play, and that they carry it out voluntarily and unconditionally.
Otherwise, they fail to come across as authentic and are thus more likely to damage
a healthy safety culture than enhance it.
Supervisors should also integrate the fatigue factor into their daily mission
discussions, in order to regularly address the problems involved. They know
“their” staff and can ensure that the possibilities offered by the company are used
in order to avoid fatigue. Changes may need to be made to the duty roster to prevent
acute or cumulative sleep debt or other fatigue-promoting factors. For this purpose,
superiors are continually informed about new findings gained from the Fatigue Risk
Management process and also involved in further developing company-wide antifatigue programs, for which they can draw on their everyday experience.


In the error trajectory, the last “line of defense” lies primarily with the active
operative staff, such as the pilots, HEMS crew members (HCM), emergency
doctors, paramedics, flight nurses, mechanics and avionics engineers. Signs and
symptoms of fatigue include:
 Lapses in attention and vigilance
 Slowed reaction time
 Poor decision-making
 Decreased psychomotor coordination
 Frequent yawning
 Restlessness
 Moodiness
 Inadequate or lack of response when addressed
 Frequent blinking and/or lengthy phases of eyelids being closed
 Unintentional and uncontrolled micro sleeps
Staff should have a high sense of responsibility in relation to fatigue-related
risks, and should only go about their daily work if their actions will not be impaired
by fatigue at any time during their duty period or if the risk lies within the
prescribed, acceptable scope. In this respect, possible intervention activities
aimed at mitigating fatigue may also be taken into account (Sect. 11.2.3). The
following measures could be considered (Fig. 11.13).
Within the aviation industry, flight staff members are strongly dissuaded from
using sleep-inducing substances to increase sleep quality and quantity. Such drugs
and medicines cannot be dosed precisely enough and it could occur that a relatively
high level of the substance is still present in the body at the planned start of the duty
period. Moreover, the targeted intake of drugs to increase alertness or lengthen the
period of wakefulness is advised against. Quite apart from the effectiveness and
the physical side effects for employees, a more rapid degradation of the active



Short-Term Measures
 Informing each other when signs or feelings of tiredness arise
 Reduction of environmental disturbances, such as by wearing ear
plugs or a sleep mask during rest periods in the aircraft or hotel
 Taking targeted and planned naps of approx. 30-45 minutes
 Exposure to Light
 Increased use of automation in the cockpit
 Adaption of the rest times during a mission to the individual
needs of the team members
 Social interaction
 Caffeine
Medium-Term Measures
 Sound and sufficient sleep
Long-Term Measures
 Healthy eating
 Good physicial fitness
Fig. 11.13 Individual compensation measures

substance could lead to premature acute fatigue and thus render the individual
concerned unfit for duty.34
Furthermore, employees involved in support processes, such as mission
coordinators, dispatch staff or logisticians, should not only observe and assess
their own level of fatigue, but also pay attention to signs of fatigue on the part of
crew members and, where necessary, offer them the appropriate constructive
feedback or suggest an alternative course of action.

Crash risk of alcohol impaired driving. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on
alcohol, drugs and traffic safety 

 Transportation Association of Canada.

 Managing fatigue: It’s about sleep. Sleep Medicine

 Fatigue, alcohol and performance impairment. Nature,
388, 235.

Besides all the national and international regulations and proactive safety measures,
also the findings of the accident investigation authority are of central importance in
the combined effort to make aviation safer.
The accident investigation authority (Schweizerische Unfalluntersuchungsstelle—SUST) examines aircraft accidents and issues recommendations to
the Board of FOCA which later proposes measures to increase safety in aviation.

The following aircraft accident case has been partially extracted from the final
investigation report of the Air France A330-203 flight AF 447 from Rio de Janeiro
to Paris in 2009. The aircraft was destroyed upon crashing in the Atlantic Ocean,
killing all 216 passengers and 12 crew members. This case serves as an example to
illustrate a general safety relevant trend. Pilots continuously fail to apply their most
expedient knowledge and skills for manual flight operations by following standard
operation procedures. It should be clearly understood that in this accident case
details of the investigation are discussed as examples only and in a simplified
manner to fit the scope of this section.
On 31 May 2009, the Airbus A330 flight AF 447 took off from Rio de Janeiro
Galeão airport bound for Paris Charles de Gaulle. The airplane was in contact with
the Brazilian ATLANTICO control centre on the INTOL–SALPU–ORARO–
TASIL route at FL350. At around 2 h 02, the Captain left the cockpit. At around


2 h 08, the crew made a course change of 12 to the left, probably to avoid returns
detected by the weather radar (Fig. 12.1).1
At 2 h 10 min 05, the autopilot and then the auto-thrust disconnected and the PF
said “I have the controls”. The airplane began to roll to the right and the PF made a
nose-up and left input. The stall warning triggered briefly twice in a row. The
recorded parameters showed a sharp fall from about 275 to 60 kt in the speed
displayed on the left primary flight display (PFD), then a few moments later in the
speed displayed on the integrated standby instrument system (ISIS). The flight
control law reconfigured from normal to alternate. The Flight Directors
(FD) were not disconnected by the crew, but the crossbars disappeared.
At 2 h 10 min 16, the PNF said “we’ve lost the speeds” then “alternate law
protections”. The PF made rapid and high amplitude roll control inputs, more or
less from stop to stop. He also made a nose-up input that increased the airplane’s
pitch attitude up to 11 in 10 s.
Between 2 h 10 min 18 and 2 h 10 min 25, the PNF read out the ECAM messages
in a disorganized manner. He mentioned the loss of auto-thrust and the reconfiguration to alternate law. The thrust lock function was de-activated. The PNF called
out and turned on the wing anti-icing. The PNF said that the airplane was climbing
and asked the PF several times to descend. The latter then made several nose-down


inputs that resulted in a reduction in the pitch attitude and the vertical speed. The
airplane was then at about 37,000 ft and continued to climb.
At about 2 h 10 min 36, the speed displayed on the left side became valid again
and was then 223 kt; the ISIS speed was still erroneous. The airplane had lost about
50 kt since the autopilot disconnection and the beginning of the climb. The speed
displayed on the left side was incorrect for 29 s.
At 2 h 10 min 47, the thrust controls were pulled back slightly to 2/3 of the IDLE/
CLB notch (85 % of N1). Two seconds later, the pitch attitude came back to a little
above 6 , the roll was controlled and the angle of attack was slightly less than 5 .
From 2 h 10 min 50, the PNF called the Captain several times.
At 2 h 10 min 51, the stall warning triggered again, in a continuous manner. The
thrust levers were positioned in the TO/GA detent and the PF made nose-up inputs.
The recorded angle of attack, of around 6 at the triggering of the stall warning,
continued to increase. The trimmable horizontal stabilizer (THS) began a nose-up
movement and moved from 3 to 13 pitch-up in about 1 min and remained in the
latter position until the end of the flight. Around 15 s later, with the ADR3 being
selected on the right side PFD, the speed on the PF side became valid again at the
same time as that displayed on the ISIS. It was then at 185 kt and the three displayed
airspeeds were consistent. The PF continued to make nose-up inputs. The airplane’s
altitude reached its maximum of about 38,000 ft; its pitch attitude and angle of
attack were 16 .
At 2 h 11 min 37, the PNF said “controls to the left”, took over priority without
any callout and continued to handle the airplane. The PF almost immediately took
back priority without any callout and continued piloting.
At around 2 h 11 min 42, the Captain re-entered the cockpit. During the
following seconds, all of the recorded speeds became invalid and the stall warning
stopped, after having sounded continuously for 54 s. The altitude was then about
35,000 ft, the angle of attack exceeded 40 and the vertical speed was about
10,000 ft/min. The airplane’s pitch attitude did not exceed 15 and the engines’
N1’s were close to 100 %. The airplane was subject to roll oscillations to the right
that sometimes reached 40 . The PF made an input on the side-stick to the left stop
and nose-up, which lasted about 30 s.
At 2 h 12 min 02, the PF said, “I have no more displays”, and the PNF “we have
no valid indications”. At that moment, the thrust levers were in the IDLE detent and
the engines’ N1’s were at 55 %. Around 15 s later, the PF made pitch-down inputs.
In the following moments, the angle of attack decreased, the speeds became valid
again and the stall warning triggered again.
At 2 h 13 min 32, the PF said, “[we’re going to arrive] at level one hundred”.
About 15 s later, simultaneous inputs by both pilots on the side-sticks were recorded
and the PF said, “Go ahead you have the controls”.
The angle of attack, when it was valid, always remained above 35 .
From 2 h 14 min 17, the Ground Proximity Warning System (GPWS) “sink rate”
and then “pull up” warnings sounded.


The recordings stopped at 2 h 14 min 28. The last recorded values were a vertical
speed of 10,912 ft/min, a ground speed of 107 kt, pitch attitude of 16.2 nose-up,
roll angle of 5.3 left and a magnetic heading of 270 (Fig. 12.2).
No emergency message was transmitted by the crew. The wreckage was found at
a depth of 3,900 m on 2 April 2011 at about 6.5 NM on the radial 019 from the last
position transmitted by the airplane.2
 The examinations of the wreckage undertaken showed that there was no depressurization and that on impact:
– The airplane was intact;
– The airplane struck the surface of the water with a pitch-up attitude, a slight
bank and a high vertical speed;
– The flaps were retracted;
– The engines were at high RPM ;
– The stabilizer was near to its maximum pitch-up position.
 This information was confirmed by the analysis of the data from the flight
recorders.
 The blockage of the Pitot probes by ice crystals in cruise was a phenomenon that
was known, but misunderstood, by the aviation community at the time of the
accident. From an operational perspective, the resulting loss of all airspeed
information was an identified malfunction. After initial reactions involving
basic airmanship skills, this blockage should have been diagnosed by the pilots
and managed, if necessary, by precautionary inputs on the pitch attitude and
thrust as detailed in the associated procedure.
 The occurrence of the failure in the context of flight in cruise completely
surprised the crew of flight AF 447. The apparent difficulties of handling the
airplane in turbulence at high altitude resulted in over-handling in roll and a
sharp nose-up input by the PF. The destabilization that resulted from the
climbing flight path and changes in pitch attitude and vertical speed therefore
added to the incorrect airspeed indications and ECAM messages that did not help
any diagnosis. The crew, whose work was becoming disrupted, probably never
realized they were facing a “simple” loss of all three airspeed sources.
 In the first minute after the autopilot disconnection, the failure of the attempt to
understand the situation and the disruption of crew cooperation had a
multiplying effect, inducing total loss of cognitive control of the situation. The
behavioral assumptions underlying the classification of a loss of airspeed
2

information as “major” were not validated in the context of this accident.
Confirmation of this classification therefore requires additional work in terms
of operational feedback in order to modify, where necessary, crew training and
the ergonomics of the information made available to them, as well as the design
of procedures.
The airplane went into a sustained stall, signaled by the stall warning and strong
buffet. Despite these persistent symptoms, the crew never understood they were
in a stall situation and therefore never undertook any recovery maneuvers. The
combination of the warning system ergonomics, and the conditions under which
pilots are trained and exposed to stalls during their professional and recurrent
training, did not result in a reasonably reliable, expected behavior patterns.
At present, recognition of the stall warning, even when associated with buffet,
assumes that the crew assigns a minimum degree of “legitimacy” to the alarm.
This in turn assumes sufficient prior experience with stall conditions, at least
some cognitive availability and understanding of the situation, as well as knowledge of the airplane (and its protection modes) and its flight physics. A review of
pilot training did not provide convincing evidence that the associated skills had
been correctly developed and maintained.
More generally, the dual failure of the expected procedural responses shows the
limits of the current safety model. When action by the crew is expected, it is
always assumed that they will have the capacity to initially control the flight path
and to rapidly diagnose and identify the correct entry in the dictionary of
procedures. A crew may encounter an unexpected situation causing a momentary but profound loss of understanding. If, in such cases, the assumed capacity
to initially control and then to diagnose is lost, the safety model is in “common
failure mode”. In this occurrence, the inability to initially control the flight path
also made it impossible to understand the situation and find the appropriate
solution.
The accident resulted from the following succession of events:
– Temporary inconsistency between the measured airspeeds, likely following
the obstruction of the Pitot probes by ice crystals that led in particular to
autopilot disconnection and a reconfiguration to alternate law,
– Inappropriate control inputs that destabilized the flight path,
– The crew not making the connection between the loss of indicated airspeeds
and the appropriate procedure,
– The PNF’s late identification of the deviation in the flight path and insufficient correction by the PF,
– The crew not identifying the approach to stall, the lack of an immediate
reaction on its part and exit from the flight envelope,
– The crew’s failure to diagnose the stall situation and, consequently, the lack
of any actions that would have made recovery possible (Figs. 12.3/12.4).”3,4

It must be noted that the pilots were not the sole factor behind the crash, but also
various factors which already start at the stage of the pilot training play a part. As
already mentioned, there was no convincing evidence that the required stall recovery skills had been correctly developed; nor had they been maintained through
constant training on the type of aircraft by the flight crew. Each flight crew member
trained stall recovery on the A320 model, but had no specialized stall recovery
procedural training on the A330. Additional A330 and A340 type ratings deal only
with the differences in relation to the type ratings already issued on other types
(A320, A330, and A340).
The accident investigation report shows that the pilots reacted according to the
standard operational procedures. Neither false system indications nor a stall should
lead to an accident; however, pull and full throttle during a stall will lead to an
accident.
It must be understood that accident prevention starts with the pilot training and
should include Stall & Spin awareness and basic aerobatic maneuvers. In an
emergency, the systems provide only limited support to the pilot, and simulator
training is not sufficient for a basic understanding of flying. Swiss Aviation
Training leads by example and uses an Extra 300 for stall, spin and recovery


training during their MPL training. The integration of stall, spin and recovery
training concepts, and carefully selected aerobatic maneuvers during flight training,
which provide upset recovery procedures, are critical to the development of a
properly aware and self-confident pilot.
At the beginning of April 2013, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a
Safety Alert where it encouraged operators to take an integrated approach by
incorporating emphasis on manual flight operations into both line operations and
training (initial/upgrade and recurrent). Where applicable, the operators should
develop operational policies or review them to ensure there are appropriate
opportunities for pilots to exercise manual flying skills, such as in non-RVSM
airspace and during low workload conditions.


Furthermore, the FAA recommends developing or reviewing company policies
to ensure that pilots understand when to use the automated systems, such as during
high workload conditions or airspace procedures that require use of autopilot for
precise operations. Augmented crew operations may also limit the ability of some
pilots to obtain practice in manual flight operations. Finally, airline operational
policies should ensure that all pilots have the appropriate opportunities to exercise
the aforementioned knowledge and skills during inflight operations.5


This second accident case has been extracted partially from the final investigation
report of the Crossair Avro 146-RJ100 flight CRX3597 in 2001 from Berlin-Tegel
to Zürich.
The aircraft was destroyed during the impact, killing all 21 passengers and
3 crew members. This case serves as an example to illustrate how fatigue can
contribute as a factor to an aircraft accident. Also here, it should be clearly
understood that in this accident case, details of the investigation are discussed as
examples only and in a simplified manner to fit the scope of this section.
On November, 24th, 2001, at 20:01 UTC (21:01 lcl) the airplane AVRO 146-RJ
100, registered HB–IXM, took off from Berlin-Tegel airport as CROSSAIR CRX
3597 bound for Zurich/CH.
At 20:58:50, after an undisturbed flight, CRX 3597 was cleared for a VOR-DME
approach into rwy 28 at ZRH. Preceding traffic CRX 3891 (Embraer EMB 145)
landed on rwy 28 and reported to the control tower that the weather conditions
found on approach and landing were quite close to the minimum required.
At 21:05:21, CRX 3597 reported on the tower frequency. At 21:06:10, when the
flight reached the minimum descent altitude for this approach, the commander
stated “some ground visibility” to the first officer and continued the descent towards
the runway.
At 21:06:36 UTC the aircraft collided with treetops and subsequently crashed
into the ground. The aircraft caught fire on impact. Twenty-one passengers and
three crew members died from their injuries at the site of the accident; seven
passengers and two crew members survived the accident.


The accident was caused by the flight crew’s descent below the published minimum
descent altitude for the VOR-DME 28/ZRH approach even though the requirements


for such a course of action had not been fulfilled. A go-around maneuver was
initiated too late.
The commander continued below the MDA without having established visual
contact with the landing runway or runway lighting. The first officer did not make
any effort to prevent such an action by the commander.



The following contributing factors (among others) were identified:
 Lack of crew performance records
 Lack of crew duty and rest-time records and responsibilities
 Selection of landing runway by established procedures
 Unavailability of MSAW for rwy 28
 Unsuitable recording and publishing of meteorological data
 Lack of air traffic control personnel
 Unsuitability of designed approach procedure
 Unsuitability of depiction of obstacles in approach charts
 Flying and corporate culture in the company
The accident is attributable to the fact that on the final approach, in own
navigation, of the standard VOR/DME approach 28, the aircraft flew in a controlled
manner into a wooded range of hills (controlled flight into terrain—CFIT). This was
caused by the fact that the flight crew deliberately continued the descent under
instrument flight conditions below the minimum altitude for the approach, without
having the necessary prerequisites. The flight crew initiated the go around too late.
The investigation has determined the following causal factors in relation to the
accident:
The commander deliberately descended below the minimum descent altitude
(MDA) of the standard VOR/DME approach 28 without having the required
visual contact to the approach lights or the runway.
The copilot made no attempt to prevent the continuation of the flight below the
minimum descent altitude.


The Following Factors Contributed to the Accident
 In the approach sector of runway 28 at Zurich airport there was no system
available which triggers an alarm if a minimum safe altitude is violated (minimum safe altitude warning—MSAW).
 Over a long period of time, the responsible persons of the airline had not made
correct assessments of the commander’s flying performance. Where weaknesses
were perceptible, they did not take appropriate measures.
The final report of the accident investigation shows that the commander had clearly
exceeded the maximum allowable operating times in the 2 days before the accident.
Through his work as a part-time flight instructor before the scheduled service time,

he was more than 13.5 h on duty at the time of the accident. A prolonged break from
work, for relaxation or sleep, was missing. The commander was thus clearly
exhausted, leading to impaired concentration and decision-making skills. He was,
as well, error-prone. The SUST concluded from the events that the observed fatigue
met the criteria for an impairment of fitness to fly and classified fatigue as a factor
behind the accident. The SUST turned to the FOCA with a recommendation to
check how to control flight duties and rest times.7


A general problem within the SMS literature is that the majority of the implementation structures and recommendations are tailored to large enterprises. If you
follow these plans, it might take months until you come to the point where you
can start identifying your first risks. Our philosophy is to immediately start with the
collection of risks in order to gain an overview of the main issues the organization is
facing, and to work on mitigating them as soon as possible. We therefore compressed the following implementation structure down to the essentials, to quickly
move to the risk collection. The following SMS implementation process is divided
into four different phases, in order to split up the workload and to provide a
convenient structure to follow when implementing the Safety Management System.
The time horizon of four years will also allow leeway to adjust the culture within a
company and to create a positive safety culture. The following section will give an
overview of the different phases with their corresponding implementation subjects,
as well as providing tools as practical examples and guidance for the implementation. Each topic will be addressed in this chapter with a brief explanation including
the required deliverables.


In a competitive environment organizations have to constantly adapt and change in
order to preserve and to increase financial returns. The dynamics of adaption and
change include risks which can create internal resistance to change. For that reason,
creating and sustaining substantive strategic changes can only be achieved by those
organizations that foster a risk seeking culture with the willingness to change the
future position of the organization.1
A successful strategy is always connected to the right planning and effective
implementation. For that reason, the implementation requires simple, consistent,
long-term goals, a profound understanding of the competitive environment and an
objective appraisal of the required resources.2 According to Dong, Neufeld, and
Higgins (2009), organizations are challenged by the implementation of large scale
information system (IS) projects—only 35 % of companies in the United States
completed their IS implementation on time. In 2003, KPMG conducted a survey
among 230 of the largest global companies discovering 57 % had written off at least
one IT project in the previous 12 months, and of those experiencing an implementation failure only 41 % were able to calculate how much costs were incurred for
their company.3
Top management support during new management system implementations is
crucial, as we expect top management to influence and shape the behaviors of others
in the organization. The appropriate provision of resources is necessary for a
m implementation, but appears not to have a positive influence
on user satisfaction. Top management actions should not be static—it is important
that the management can adjust behavior throughout an implementation process.4
The study of Dong, Neufeld, and Higgins (2009) further showed that supportive
behavior, rather than just expressed support, ultimately determines the implementation outcomes. This implies that top management need to actively engage with
supportive actions to ensure that the strategic visions are internalized and appropriately implemented.5
In addition, Olsen and Boxenbaum (2009) examined organizational barriers
which hindered the implementation of a new management system within an organization. These organizational barriers posed a significant obstacle to the implementation in general and required a shift in the implementation strategy from a
decentralized to a more centralized approach. They identified three types of organizational barriers, namely a cognitive barrier of conflicting mindsets, a processrelated barrier of radical change of routines, as well as a structural barrier which
was based on diverse project evaluation criteria.6
The first type of organizational barrier can be connected to the dominant mindset
of key actors in the operational area who are reluctant to change and do not embrace
new projects. The fundamental problem lies in the contradictory aims concerning
the relationship between an organization’s financial performance and its commitment to sustainability.
The second identified organizational barrier was the difficulty to change organizational processes which required a complete reorientation of the existing work
processes in the operational environment. In principle, obstacles of this kind could
be overcome by organizational learning and training programs.
The third barrier relates to different evaluation criteria employed by the strategic
planning groups and the operations department to assess new market opportunities.
Olsen and Boxenbaum (2009) found that there is a fundamental difference between
the Net Present Value (NPV) evaluation method and the business risk evaluation
method employed by operations. The NPV technique is a common financial metric
often used by companies when evaluating the value of new market opportunities. In
contrast, business risk evaluation is similarly used to assess the risks associated with
new projects.
Furthermore, McFadden and Hosmane (2001) argued that in the field of
operations management, improving safety has become a growing area of interest.
Operations managers in the aviation industry, e.g. Boeing or Honeywell, have
specified safety as their top operating priorities. Even before all regulatory
pressures, the total quality movement, technological changes, cost-saving
objectives and customer expectations of social responsibility, just to mention a
few, can be named as motivating factors for considering safety as the core priority

for the operating environment. Safety management has become crucial for
companies, as an aviation accident can be viewed as the ultimate service failure.
Passengers of airlines expect 100 % accuracy when it comes to safety.7



In Phase I of the Safety Management System implementation, the basic structure
should be developed and a compliance document has to be issued which identifies
the Accountable Executive and the person within the organization who is responsible for the implementation of the SMS. To show how the SMS requirements will be
met, a gap analysis has to be conducted which identifies the variations between the
company’s policy and the authority regulations, and states which components are in
place and which elements have to be added or modified. This phase mainly focuses
on basic planning and the assignment of responsibilities, where the core priority is a
clear roadmap which should serve as a reference. The company’s organizational
chart should clearly illustrate the roles, responsibilities and safety accountabilities
which are the basis for effective safety violation handling. Therefore, all levels of
management and supervisory levels are encouraged to define, communicate and
document their individual and shared responsibilities for safety performance.
Senior management is accountable for safety within the company. It must clearly
ensure that everyone has a responsibility for safety, and should emphasize that it is
essential to facilitate safety management as an integral strategic aspect of the
organization’s business.8,9
The key deliverables comprise the following:
 Gap analysis
 Safety objectives of the organization approved by accountable executive
 Safety Policy signed by accountable executive
 Safety Policy distributed across entire organization
 SMS organizational structure in place
 Lines of safety accountability established
 Approval of SMS implementation plan and initial training
 Emergency response planning implementation process

14.1.1 Project Planning and Implementation
During the project planning phase, an implementation project plan has to be
developed which serves as a basis for a structured approach to the Safety
7

Management System implementation. It guides the organization through the different implementation phases and provides a structure to assess the progress.
 The start of the SMS implementation should be initiated by appointing the
person, or establishing the planning group, responsible for the development of
the SMS implementation project plan.
 All applicable documents that contribute to the SMS implementation plan
should be collected.
 The costs associated for training and planning of the implementation must be
identified, so that the budget for SMS implementation can be drafted and
approved.
 Establishing the allocation of time for the development and deployment of the
SMS implementation plan among the different management layers of the organization is the next step.
 Then the organization must allocate resources for the SMS implementation and
generate a draft budget.
 Finally, submitting the SMS implementation plan for endorsement by senior
management and conducting regular meetings to assess progress are the last
steps.


First of all, to start the SMS implementation process, it is essential to perform a gap
analysis to identify already existing safety management measures within the organization and those parts that are missing in the organizational context. Based upon
the results of the gap analysis, the responsible individuals for the implementation
should be able to develop a SMS implementation plan. At the beginning of the
planning process, the identification of potential gaps that may hinder the SMS
implementation phases have to be accounted for, and the development of strategies
to address such gaps have to be developed in advance. An example of a gap analysis
can be found in Appendix: SMS Gap Analysis.
During the gap analysis it is advisable to identify, collect and store the
SMS-specific records and documentation and to develop guidelines for SMS record
management.


A Safety Policy, signed by the accountable executive and which is communicated
throughout the organization has to be developed. The safety policy is a high level
statement of desired corporate safety performance. The Safety Policy serves as
guidance regarding who has a direct or indirect impact on safety performance and
should provide specific directions to ensure that any safety management activity
targeted has an impact on the improvement of the safety level within the organization. A Safety Policy generally describes high level accountabilities and

Organizational Challenges and Phases of Implementation and Optimization

157

responsibilities of the organization and the personnel involved in the operation. It
prescribes measurable standards, and should be constructed so that short and longterm safety goals and objectives (or safety performance targets) are accounted for.
A sample Safety Policy can be found in Appendix: Sample Safety Policy.
To assure that the Safety Policy and operational safety is followed, it is
recommended to establish measurable targets which are monitored on a regular
basis by a safety committee.
Each aviation organization should conduct their business according to the
following key safety principles:
 Safety is considered as the core value of the company
 Everyone is responsible for the identification, reporting and management of risks
 Always operate in the safest manner practicable
 Never take unnecessary risks
 Recognition that familiarity and prolonged exposure without a mishap leads to a
loss of appreciation of risk
 Safe does not mean risk free


In order to have a precise overview of the accountabilities, clear lines of communication between the Safety Manager, the Accountable Executive, the Safety Action
Group (SAG) and the Safety Review Board (SRB) have to be established. In
connection to this, it is mandatory to appoint a Safety Manager as the responsible
individual and focal point for the development and maintenance of an effective
SMS. The assessment of functional lines of communication should be commensurate with the size of the organization and complexity of the services provided.
 Firstly appoint senior managers, including line managers responsible for functional areas, to the SRB.
 Then, assign the SRB appropriate strategic and tactical functions in order to
process safety relevant information and lessons learned.
 Finally, develop a schedule of meetings among the safety service office with the
SRB and SAG as needed.
Looking at the key success factors of a safety culture and clear safety
accountabilities, it becomes obvious that executive management involvement
leads to a vital basis for Safety Management. Without the commitment and support
of executive management, a Safety Management System will not work effectively.
The Accountable Executive must emphasize the company’s dedication to safety,
enforce safety as one primary responsibility off all managers, and inform all
personnel about the plan to achieve the highest safety standards.
No initiative or plan started by staff will have any effect if executive management is not fully dedicated to an SMS implementation. Employees need support
from the executive management, and the supply of all appropriate resources to run
an SMS efficiently. Types of resources include time for meetings, as well as
information gathering and planning. Managers must decide on a person who will


 

attend seminars and training courses. Managers must also decide to involve people
who already have the expertise and can improve the Safety Management System’s
practicality e.g. consultants.10 In order to make a full commitment and support
Safety Management, the executive must have an understanding of Risk Management and the corresponding processes. Consequently, executive management must
ensure that all policies and safety objectives are understood, applied and maintained
at all levels.11

14.1.5 Safety Requirements and Accountabilities of Subcontractors
The management of subcontractors is something that has to be thought about when
implementing Safety Management System processes. The primary purpose of
safety requirements and accountabilities for subcontractors is to include them in
your risk management process. Subcontractors provide goods or services and often
also operate in the same environment, e.g. at an airport. Some incidents or accidents
can be directly caused by subcontractors, e.g. by a ground handling provider for an
airline. Therefore, it becomes important to define safety requirements,
accountabilities and interfaces between your organization and the subcontractors.
There have to be processes in place which assess the subcontractor’s operations, to
identify associated hazards and to check the quality of the service they provide.

14.1.6 Safety Management Manual
Draft a Safety Management Manual (SMM) to communicate the organization’s
approach to safety across the whole organization. The SMM is a living document
and its contents may be expanded, reviewed and amended as the phased approach of
the SMS evolves. The Safety Management Manual serves as a basis guide for all
personnel involved in the safety of an organization’s flight, maintenance or general
operations. Such a manual should define the policy that governs the safety of
operations of an aviation company. A Safety Management Manual should deliver
a reactive and pro-active, integrated approach to safety management. Safety Management should be seen as a part of an overall management process that the
organization should adopt in order to ensure that the goals of the organization can
be accomplished. Hazards should be identified and dealt with systematically
through a hazard identification program that facilitates continuing improvement
and professionalism.

In Phase II the focus is to correct potential deficiencies within the system and to
work on key Safety Management processes. This step should be supported by
conducting an analysis based on information obtained through reactive data collection measures. Just to mention a few, these data sources can comprise collected
hazards, identified weaknesses in processes, audit findings and information from
past incidents or accidents. The organization should demonstrate that it has certain
components of the SMS in place:
 The Safety Management System elements from Phase I
 Reactive processes
 Investigation and analysis procedures
 Risk Management procedure
 Training for personnel and assigned duties within the SMS
 Documented policies and procedures of the SMS
A detailed understanding of the operational systems is a prerequisite for the risk
management process. Those systems encompass the organizational structures,
processes and procedures, people, equipment, and facilities which have a contribution to the organization’s productivity. An in depth systems engineering analysis
will emphasize the interactions between hardware such as aircraft, software, people
and the environment. It points out weaknesses in the identification of hazards and
associated risks.12
The risk management process described in this chapter is the fundamental task to
control risks at an acceptable level and can be seen as the key task in Safety
Management. The process consists of identifying hazards and what kind of potential risk scenarios can be derived from those hazards. Furthermore, assessing the
risks and developing mitigation measures is the key to controlling safety risks and
monitoring the effects of safety actions. The underlying strategy of Risk Management is that the likelihood and severity of an event occurring can be minimized.
Risk Management is a basis for decision making regarding how to handle
occurrences which affect aviation safety. And it is a basis for incident assessments
about their implications and evaluating the results. A key to success is constant and
direct communication throughout the organization.13

and are present within the company’s processes and operations. Identified hazards
need to be gathered and analyzed in order to avoid fatal accidents. People are rarely
aware of hazards; therefore, documentation plays a key role when actively managing safety. Knowledge is an essential requirement for proactive hazard management
and must be shared within the organization, especially for the management of raw
data and assessment of hazard-related information. A historical data collection of
hazards and safety relevant information provides a solid base for generating a
quantitative analysis, thus allowing decisions to be based on facts rather than
relying on personal opinions. The database has to be able to manage the raw data
and to display it so that conclusions regarding hazards can be drawn. Consequently,
standardizing the reporting, defining the terms (including the measurement of
safety information), and management of the tracking and analysis of hazards are
key prerequisites.15
Appendix: Master Risk List Examples show possible master risk lists, where
identified and collected hazards have to be assessed according to their consequences
and risks have to be prioritized accordingly. Bearing the hazards and risks in mind,
control and mitigation strategies have to be developed by involving experts responsible
for implementing strategies and looking at the collected data.
Consequently, the next step is to perform an operational process analysis and
re-evaluate the strategies by involving this data. The outcome of the data analysis
provides Safety Management information and serves to increase overall safety by
issuing safety bulletins and reports, as well as helping to build up seminars and
workshops for educational functions.16 The key to success is reliable data which
should be collected for each flight. This data can then be used to put emphasis on
operational issues or to categorize operations according to their level of risk. The
feedback of the analysis can be used to adjust the collection methods towards best
practices. Hazards should be periodically reported by staff and should be identified
during regular, scheduled risk identification surveys, audits and inspections, or
discovered by evaluating accidents, incidents and risky situations and should be
documented in the risk register.

1Reporting Procedure and Whistleblowing
Safety Risk Management includes specifying the means of collecting, recording,
acting on and generating feedback about hazards and risks in daily operations. First
of all, it must be determined what form of intervention tools have to be used to
collect reactive information. The next paragraph shows a common example of a
reactive approach by identifying hazards in the form of an Air Safety Report (ASR).
Subsequently, it has to be decided which reporting system will be required and
adapted to the organization. Three different approaches are common throughout

various aviation organizations: mandatory, voluntary or confidential reporting
systems. It is also possible to directly contact the Safety Manager and provide
direct feedback. The reporting of safety relevant information promotes learning
from reactive information, like already encountered incidents, and prepares the
organization for proactive reporting to prevent safety relevant incidents in the
future. Appendix: ASR/Hazard Reporting Procedure illustrates a possible reporting
procedure to collect reactive and proactive safety relevant information.
According to ICAO17 the following key principles are to be considered when
establishing a voluntary reporting system within the generic framework of an
organization’s SMS.
Trust—The reporting persons must be certain that the information they provide
will not be used against them; otherwise, they will be reluctant to report their
mistakes. A positive Safety Culture in the organization provides the foundations of
a successful occurrence reporting system.
Non-punitive—The reporting person must be protected against legal, administrative or disciplinary sanctions, except in the case of gross negligence, criminal
activity or intent.
Inclusive Reporting Base—The systematic approach to safety management
requires that voluntary reporting be targeted at all aspects of aircraft operation,
such as flight operation, cabin safety, aircraft maintenance, air navigation services,
aerodrome operation, etc. Also, collecting information on the same occurrence
from different perspectives provides a complete analysis and understanding of
events, and consequently of the hazards and their effects.
Confidentiality—Non-punitive systems are based on confidential reporting.
The person reporting an incident must be sure that his/her identity, and other
information that may be used to identify other involved physical or legal
personalities, will not be disclosed. In some states legislation on access to information makes it increasingly difficult to guarantee confidentiality. This could limit the
safety occurrence reporting to the minimum required for mandatory reporting.
Independence—Ideally, the voluntary reporting system is operated by an organization that is separate from the state regulatory authorities. This organization
collects and analyzes safety reports and feeds the results back to the regulatory
authorities and the aviation community.
Ease of reporting—Submitting a report should be as easy as possible for the
reporter. The reporting forms should be readily available to anyone wishing to file a
report. They should be easy to compile, provide adequate space for narrative and
make maximum use of a comparable format. The forms should encourage safety
improvement suggestions, such as how to prevent the reoccurrence of a hazard or
how to deal with it.
Acknowledgment—To encourage further submission of reports, the organization should clearly communicate to its personnel that the voluntary reports are a
valuable safety asset and acknowledge the efforts made by reporting persons.


 

Whenever possible, feedback on the actions taken in response to a report should be
provided to the reporting person.
Promotion—The de-identified information received from the voluntary
reporting system should be made available to the aviation community in a timely
manner. One form of reporting is described in the Swiss Voluntary Reporting
Systems (SWANS). A variety of information dissemination methods should be
used to achieve maximum exposure, for example monthly newsletters, periodic
summaries, safety bulletins published on the Internet, etc. Such promotional activity may help motivate people to further improve the reporting of safety occurrences.
Furthermore; another form of reporting procedure which can be closely linked
with safety management is “Whistle blowing”, which means “the disclosure by any
employee ( former or current) of illegal, immoral, or illegitimate practices under
the control of their employers to persons or organizations.”18 Employees are, based
on their insider knowledge, in the most suitable position to establish transparency
and to inform about mismanagement and misconduct in the company
environment.19
Whistle blowing, with regard to the workforce in organizations, can be split into
four different components. One element is an individual who is willing to disclose
company internal information and make it available outside the organization. The
second element can be described as the conversion of that specific information into
general information which is then available to the public. Usually, that information
is about mistakes and mismanagement or scandalous material from internal
sources, which is typically revealed by current or former employees of the
company.20
A quite recent whistle blowing example is the case “Bradley Manning”, an
American soldier who was arrested in May 2010 in Iraq on suspicion of having
passed restricted material to the website Wiki Leaks. He was accused in July 2010
of transferring classified data to his personal computer and communicating a large
amount of data and US national defense information to an unauthorized source.21
Despite the fact of benefitting the public by revealing this secret information,
whistleblowers are normally not aware of the negative consequences they have to
face after their waiver of professional secrecies.22 Colleagues and superiors may no
longer welcome people who they regard as traitors. Often responsibilities will be
removed or whistleblowers transferred to less interesting tasks and projects.23
Nevertheless, an active, implemented whistle blowing system can prevent
organizations from the exposure of harmful information to external sources.



Organizational Challenges and Phases of Implementation and Optimization

163

It can serve as a shield to keep the report within the company and to reflect the
concern internally. This sort of system can prevent a company’s loss of reputation,
especially when safety is concerned.24

14.2.2.1 Air Safety Report
Each aviation organization should make every effort to ensure the highest possible
safety standards for its flight operations. In addition to ongoing training and
education, this should also involve the analysis of events adversely affecting the
safety of operations. A prerequisite is to record and analyze safety relevant events.
In order to ensure the collection of data affecting flight safety, and to analyze such
data based on defined criteria, an Air Safety Report (for aircraft operators) serves as
the best solution to raise flight safety standards within an organization. By filing
their reports, all staff members help to raise the level of safety by identifying
possible hazards within daily operations. In particular, reports should include
descriptions of events which affected flight safety. In addition, reporting failures
or other safety-relevant situations allows operators to take a proactive approach.
The Safety Manager can encourage the relevant employees to take preventive
measures, thus raising the level of flight safety.
Experience gathered from accident analysis shows that the possibility of anonymous reporting should be provided. This feature, which gives the staff the option to
report anonymously or officially, should be included in the reporting system.
However, when employees decide to file their reports anonymously, there is no
possibility to acquire more details from the reporters. When staff members prepare
their reports, they can classify their information as “anonymous” by not giving their
names. Appendix: Sample Air Safety Report provides a sample of an Air Safety
Report where hazards or flight safety relevant information can be collected. Appendix:
Safety Manager Evaluation Sheet shows the assessment of the collected hazard which
has to be assessed according to the risk matrix in Fig. 14.2.
14.2.2.2 Swiss Voluntary Reporting Systems (SWANS)25
The Swiss Voluntary Reporting System offers, in addition to the mandatory
reporting system of the Swiss Federal Office of Aviation (FOCA), the possibility
of reporting occurrences and safety critical events on a voluntary and anonymous
basis. This reporting system aims to encourage increased reporting of safety-related
occurrences. Reports should be filed if an operational interruption, defect, fault or
other irregular circumstance that has or may have influenced the safety of an
aircraft, its occupants or any other person occurs. It is also possible to report
occurrences which as yet present no risk, but which could, if not corrected, present
a potential risk to the safety of the aviation system.
The reports are analyzed by FOCA’s Safety and Risk Management office, which
is independent and completely separate from the divisions responsible for


supervisory tasks and conducting criminal proceedings. This reporting system is
part of a new culture – a “just culture” as described in Part I, Sect. 4.8. Civil aviation
actors are encouraged to openly report important safety-related information in a
proactive way. The analysis of the collected reports helps to identify potential risks
in aviation in order to learn from them by taking appropriate and proactive
measures to mitigate risks to an acceptable level before they cause any harm.
However, FOCA also states that the new reporting system does not always offer
protection from prosecution. FOCA only forgoes initiating criminal proceedings
under two conditions:
 First, the occurrence is not a deliberate or grossly negligent breach of the
applicable standards and regulations
 Second, the office learned of the occurrence through this reporting system.
The SWANS reports can be filed by anyone directly or indirectly involved in
aviation, who uses aviation services or who makes safety-related observations in
this field. Reports can be filed at FOCA anonymously or openly by means of a
SWANS report as illustrated in Fig. 14.1.
The reporting form is available in electronic form online and can be sent to the
SWANS reporting office by mail, fax or e-mail. Appendix: SWANS Report shows
the SWANS report format. The submitted information is handled by FOCA using
the following process flow.

14.2.3 Prioritization in the Master Risk List and Elimination
of Irrelevant Risks
All collected risks are documented in a so called master risk list. Appendix: Master
Risk List Examples of Sect. 14.2.1 illustrates two different examples of a master
risk list. This specific list provides an overview of all the risks an organization faces
at a given point in time, depending on its actual revision status. In times of budget
cuts and limited resources it is not possible to manage all the risks effectively and
mitigate them to an acceptable level. For this reason, a prioritization of the
documented risks has to be performed with the focus on the substantial top-level
risks which have to be effectively mitigated. Throughout this prioritization a
thorough assessment of the documented risks has to be achieved, which is described
in the next chapter. The prioritization of the risks is based on the assessment and the
mapping in the risk matrix. Risks which have been classified as irrelevant are still
documented, but deleted from the master risk list.

14.2.4 Risk Assessment of Relevant Risks
The Safety Manager or a pre-determined Safety Action Group (SAG), consisting of
managers from different areas within the organization, are responsible for assessing
all reported events and hazards on the basis of a Risk Assessment Matrix which
allows determining a specific risk indicator for each occurrence. In the aviation



environment, not all risks can be eliminated. They are inherent in the daily
operations. The Risk Assessment, however, allows the analysis of each individual
hazard and identifies the level of risk to the organization. Based on these
assessments, suitable mitigation measures can be implemented in order to avoid
future reoccurrences.


the survival of an organization. Therefore, each organization has to be aware of
setting their individual financial risk criteria. It might be interesting to see how the
criteria for assessing the financial implications can be defined in concrete terms.
A first approach is the average availability of liquidity. Exceeding liquidity, for
whatever reason, leads to illiquidity and thus to bankruptcy for an organization.
A second approach is the maximum possible net financial debt to EBITDA. If
this maximum leverage factor is too high, credit agreements can be terminated by
the banks. Take the example when the EBITDA of a company is currently four
million and external ineptness accounts for six million, at a maximum allowable
leverage factor of 2.5, damage of four million would already be a disaster for the
company.
It might seem logical to insure aircraft against damage. If we take a look, for
example, at a commercially operated helicopter which crashes on a house, killing
the crew, injuring people on the ground and destroying the house the whole scenario
could be insured against. This would mean no financial loss for the company and no
risk for the continuation of daily operations. Nevertheless, as we have learned from
the past, the reputation of a company cannot be insured. Future customers might
refuse to fly or use further services from the company again which would induce
financial losses and might endanger the health and existence of that company.
Without further customers the company will go bankrupt, even though they were
insured against all losses. Therefore, protecting the reputation of a company by
rigid safety measures and constant risk management appears to be the best and most
sustainable insurance.


environment is not sufficient to apply the right mitigation strategy; it is hard to
overcome the rigid mindsets and biases of those who are closest to the problem. In
many cases, an open mindset and the ability to be creative and to think outside the
box are of great relevance.
It is not possible to control all risks to an extent that they are no longer of
relevance; in most cases it is not economically feasible to apply a certain strategy
because the protection, in terms of cost, would supersede the production (benefit).
As mentioned in the previous chapter, the risks have to be at the “as low as
reasonably practicable” level. This requires a balance of risk against time, cost
and effort to apply a mitigation measure.29

 Training of personnel to deal with the hazard.
The importance of a proposed risk mitigation measure is that the expected safety
improvement potential must be thoroughly assessed in order to exclude new risks in
the system. Finally, constant monitoring will assure that the implemented risk
mitigation measure is effective. Therefore, it is fundamental to verify that the
mitigation measures work as initially intended.36

Publication and Documentation
All reported incidents and hazards, related findings and safety performance
indicators, as well as any safety mitigation measures should be recorded and
documented by the Safety Manager, and be published and made accessible to all
staff members. Reports should be presented anonymously without disclosing any
personal data. Publication is not aimed at assigning blame or exposing individual
staff members (reports are published anonymously). Making the reports public is
aimed more at raising risk awareness among all staff to achieve an ongoing
improvement with a view to constantly improving safety levels and to sharing
important experiences. Furthermore, the gathered data has to be analyzed. The
outcome of the data analysis provides safety management information and serves to
increase overall safety by issuing safety bulletins and reports, while also helping to
build up seminars and workshops for educational functions.37 The key to success is
reliable data which should be collected for each flight or operation. This data can
then be used to put emphasis on operational issues or to categorize operations
according to their risk. The feedback of the analysis can be used to adjust the
collection methods towards best practices.

14.3.5 Emergency Response Planning (ERP)
A strong process for risk mitigation is the Emergency Response Plan—the most
critical test of an organization’s credibility is at the time of a crisis. The danger of
having the company’s reputation wounded is greatest during the first hours. Therefore, disseminating information, either from a central company source or directly
dealing with the media at the accident site must be a controlled process. An
Emergency Response Plan should be designed to assist company personnel in
fulfilling the responsibilities of the company and in responding to aircraft accident/crisis situations and incidents in the most rapid way possible. It is a structured
approach to handling a crisis and is designed to assist company personnel in
responding to aircraft accidents and incidents in the most rapid way possible. It
characterizes response procedures for all occurrences which are not ‘daily

 

business’, and requires a specific approach. The ERP acts as the guideline for the
actions to be taken during the first hours after an accident or incident occurs. All
procedures are written down in the form of checklists and serve as a guideline for
each member of a specified “Crisis Team”. These checklists ensure a standardized
performance and documentation of all activities related to the crisis and must be
kept readily available 24 hours a day. A company must ensure that all staff that may
potentially be involved in an emergency situation are fully aware of the contents of
the checklists, and that all procedures are kept up to date and all necessary
arrangements remain valid. The checklists also contain necessary forms, telephone
numbers and addresses for the accident response.38
It is of great relevance that all actions during a crisis situation are tracked. This
means that a log of key events and decisions be maintained throughout the response.
The Emergency Response Plan can be made available via hardcopy folders or
via an integrated software solution which can be accessed by each involved
employee. The documentation can be divided into two parts.
Part I, provides all the necessary background information concerning definitions
and policies which could be specified as the Emergency Response Manual. Furthermore, this part should give explanations on how to use the checklists.
Part II, should be written as different checklists in a simple “need to do” format,
giving step by step actions to be taken in a crisis in and how to document the
performed action. Moreover, Part II also contains telephone lists and useful
addresses to facilitate communication.
In general all the planning, and identifying of external entities that will interact
with the organization during emergency situations, should be made in advance.
Each employee who is involved in emergency response activities should have his
own checklist which should be harmonized with the corresponding internal
checklists of the other crisis team members. All internal emergency response
activities should be coordinated with subcontractors and suppliers in order to
identify gaps in reporting procedures or possible information or data leaks. Appendix ERP Checklist Emergency Director a checklist for an Emergency Director who
would be the coordinator and main point of contact in an emergency situation.

In order to continuously improve the Safety Management System, the organization
should establish and apply processes which support the investigation of the causes
of deviations from the prescribed safety standards. In the case of a safety critical
event, the process for the review of the SMS should be exclusively based on
immediate corrections and not on a designated periodic inspection plan. These

safety performance reviews have to be conducted periodically and must assess the
adequacy and effectiveness of the different SMS components and the effectiveness
of the corrective and improvement measures. The organization should appoint a
group of people—from top management levels (adjusted to the size and the
complexity of the organization)—that are responsible for the safety objectives
which ensure the assessment of the Safety Management System. This designated
group of people has to be equipped with the necessary competencies to make
decisions in the following listed areas:
 Improvement and effectiveness of the SMS
 Establishment/implementation of the safety policy in all organizational areas
 Allocation of the necessary funds to achieve the safety goals.
The assessment of SMS includes:
 Results of internal and external audits
 Observations concerning degree of fulfillment of safety goals
 Findings from hazard and event analysis
 Analysis and results from internal/external feedback
 Status of corrective and preventive measures
 Follow-up actions from previous system assessments
 Changes that may affect the SMS—recommendations for improvements
 Exchange of best processes across the organization.
A sufficient amount of data has to be available to provide the necessary traceability and reliability of the assessment system. Decisions resulting from the
assessment have to be disclosed within the organization by executive management
to demonstrate how the assessment process leads to new objectives which stimulate
the success of the organization. In addition, the organization should compare its
SMS with that of other organizations and be an active supporter of SMS within the
aviation industry.
In connection with continuous improvement, Change Management has become a
central buzzword in the current economic environment. Globalization and its
inherent changes have shaped the managerial landscape and established the term
Change Management as a fundamental process for organizations that constantly
have to adapt to the fast changing business environment. Change Management can
be clearly distinguished from strategic management. While strategic management
focuses on adaption to the external business environment, Change Management
focuses on the conversion of internal company processes to the desired organizational state. Change Management does not focus on the future result, but defines the
process of moving from the status quo to a desired future condition.40
Prior to undergoing any significant change that could impact flight operations, a
Change Management Process should be undertaken. Possible events that can
indicate the need for a change management process are:
 The introduction of a new aircraft type

 

 Significant change in the nature of the operation (e.g., dynamic business growth,
new operating environment, etc.)
 Changes in hiring or scheduling practices
 Changes to organizational structure
 Significant change in maintenance arrangements, etc.
As soon as a change event has been determined, the Safety Risk Assessment
should be reviewed. On the basis of that assessment, and any other available
information, the Safety Manager, or the person to whom the responsibility is
delegated, should develop a Change Management Plan. The Change Management
Plan should include an assessment of the changes required to items, such as:
 Standard operating, maintenance procedures and processes
 Personnel training and competency certification
 Amendment of Operational Manuals Part A–D
 Maintenance Control Manual or Maintenance Procedures Manual; and/or
 Aircraft SOPs, etc.
It should also include a plan for the development of the required changes. When
the required changes have been developed, a Safety Audit should be conducted
before the change is implemented. After implementation of the change, the Safety
Manager should review the system performance at regular intervals. If there is any
doubt about the effectiveness of the Change Management Process, a more comprehensive post implementation review or a Safety Audit should be conducted.


A Safety Audit is an independent evaluation of the Safety and Risk Management
System. While such an audit may be done to meet an external requirement, the
prime purpose of a Safety Audit is to identify areas in which safety performance
may be evaluated and enhanced. Safety Audits should be held at least once a year
and may be split into different modules.
A Safety Audit is used to validate the safety-risk assessment, which in turn is
employed as the basis to evaluate the safety performance. It may include:
 Visits to the operating site (Home-base);
 Interviews with managers and operational staff within the company;
 Document reviews (e.g. for completeness, currency and appropriateness); and
 An evaluation of the Safety Management tools being applied
Findings from Safety Audits should be tracked in the hazard identification
system, and may be used to update the safety-risk assessment.

14.4.1.1 Internal and External Audits
The aim of internal audits is the assessment and evaluation of all major internal
organizational processes at least once per year. Thus, permanent and systematic
target-performance comparisons of all processes and procedures should be possible.
This will obtain an objective evaluation and identification of deficiencies to allow a
subsequent proposal and initiation of corrective and preventive measures. The aim



of external audits is to monitor subcontractors according to contractual obligations
and negotiated standards.
The audit process can, in general, be divided into three steps, preparation,
implementation and completion. Moreover, it focuses on the fulfillment of the
legal and contractual requirements of different areas and processes. Furthermore,
the roles of the designated responsible persons are monitored using specific criteria
for conducting audits in the form of question catalogs. All results are logged,
evaluated and reported and reconciled with previous results along with their
corresponding improvement and implementation measures.
The final audit report should contain all detected faults, deviations, deficiencies
and potential for improvement, with an overall evaluation of the audited area and
individual evaluation of the audited processes.
Furthermore, corrective and preventive measures with responsibilities and fulfillment dates should be set, and an objective evaluation of the implementation and
efficiency of these initiated corrective measures should be monitored.


Safety promotion is a crucial part of the development and retention of a sound SMS.
The promotion should guarantee that all members of staff are appropriately trained
to work with the SMS and the organization’s safety culture; each employee is
encouraged to convey safety-relevant information and knows which actions have to
be taken. The modes of promotion include safety policies and procedures,
newsletters, and presentations which should harmonize and develop the
organization’s safety culture. The safety promotion processes must constantly be
assessed by informal workplace meetings between employees and accountable
managers to evaluate their impact on the organization.41
Safety, as the core value of an aviation organization, should underpin every
activity within the company. The organization should be structured to focus on
safety issues at all levels, and safety should be the first agenda item at every
executive meeting. There should be a safety culture in place which positively
encourages the reporting of all safety-related incidents and events. Each incident
or safety critical event should be reported, no matter how minor it may seem. In
order to promote safety as the core value, review, revise and communicate changes
to your organization’s SMS usage and standards. Use media like safety newsletters,
notices and bulletins, websites and e-mail to disseminate this information. Effective
methods to promote safety among others in this phase should include:
 Share “lessons learned” that promote improvement of the SMS
 Identify methods to communicate successes of the SMS (i.e. after training is
completed, trends identified in the documentation submitted, changes to the
safety performance indicators, etc.)
41
 

 Review the safety policy including the reporting policy
 Promote participation by all personnel in the identification of hazards
There should be a documented process for identifying training requirements, and
a validation process that measures the effectiveness of the training. An organization
needs to ensure that all employees receive appropriate safety training, where the
scope of the safety training is suitable to each individual’s involvement in the SMS.
 Accountable Managers should have a thorough understanding and awareness of
SMS roles and responsibilities, the company’s safety policy, SMS safety
standards and the measurements to assure them
 Senior Managers need to understand and communicate the regulatory
requirements for their organization and the safety standards and assurance
processes
 Managers and supervisors should be aware of the basic safety processes, like
hazard identification, Risk Management and Change Management processes to
learn from past events and to apply certain mechanisms to increase the safety
level
 Operational employees should have a basic overview of the SMS fundamentals
and the organization’s safety policy.42


Glossary43,44
Accident (Aircraft) An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft
that takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft, with the
intention of flight, until such a time as all such persons have disembarked, in
which a person is fatally or seriously injured, the aircraft sustains substantial
damage, or the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.
Air Operator Certificate (AOC) A certificate authorizing an operator to carry out
specified commercial air transport operations.
Air Traffic Control (ATC) A service provided for the purpose of controlling
aircraft movement in a manner that: (a) Prevents collisions on the maneuvering
area between aircraft and obstructions. (b) Expedites and maintains an orderly
flow of air traffic.
Audit A structured and objective assessment that determines the level of conformity with specific standards.
Change Management A systematic approach to identifying and analyzing internal and external changes with the potential to affect the functionality of an
organization, and assess and control the risks associated with such changes.
Compliance To fulfill, meet or be in accordance with requirements specified in
standards or regulations.
Defenses Specific mitigating actions, preventive controls or recovery measures put
in place to prevent the realization of a hazard or its escalation into an undesirable
consequence.
Errors An action or inaction by an operational person that leads to deviations from
organizational or operational intentions or expectations.
Emergency Response Plan (ERP) A formal plan that defines the actions taken
following an accident to ensure an orderly and efficient transition from normal to
emergency operations, and then safe continuation of operations or the return to
normal operations as soon as possible. An ERP specifies the: (a) Delegation of
emergency authority and assignment of emergency responsibilities;
(b) Authorization for action by key personnel; (c) Coordination of efforts to
cope with the emergency.
Fatigue A physiological state of reduced mental or physical performance capability resulting from sleep loss or extended wakefulness, circadian phase, or
workload (mental and/or physical activity) that can impair a crew member’s
alertness and ability to safely operate an aircraft or perform safety-related duties.
Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS) A data-driven means of continuously monitoring and managing fatigue-related safety risks, based upon scientific principles and knowledge, as well as operational experience that aims to
ensure relevant personnel are performing at adequate levels of alertness.


Framework for Safety Management Systems (SMS) The structure of a safety
management system (SMS), published in ICAO Annex 6, comprising the
4 components and 12 elements that define the minimum requirements for SMS
implementation.
Hazard (Aircraft Operations) An existing or potential condition that could lead
to or result in injury to or death of persons and/or damage to or loss of an aircraft
in operation.
ICAO Annexes Additional sections to the ICAO Convention which are
guidelines, provided for the various national aviation authorities, for use in
developing civil aviation rules and regulations that govern flight operations in
their respective states.
Quality Management System (QMS) The aggregate of the organizational
activities, plans, policies, procedures, processes, resources, responsibilities,
and infrastructure implemented to ensure all operational activities satisfy customer and regulatory requirements. A controlled documentation system is used
to reflect the plans, policies, procedures, processes, resources, responsibilities
and the infrastructure used to achieve a continuous and consistent implementation and compliance.
Safety (Operational) A condition in which the risk of injury or damage occurring
during operations is limited to an acceptable level.
Safety Action Group (SAG) A high level tactical committee within an SMS that
comprises designated line managers and representatives of front line personnel.
It takes strategic direction from the SRB and addresses the implementation and
effectiveness of risk control actions in operations. See Safety Management
System (SMS) and Safety Review Board (SRB).
Safety Assurance The component of a Safety Management System that comprises
processes for: (a) Safety performance monitoring and measurement; (b) The
management of change; (c) Continual improvement of the SMS. See Safety
Management System (SMS).
Safety Culture The extent, to which an organization actively seeks improvements,
vigilantly remains aware of hazards, and utilizes systems and tools for continuous monitoring, analysis, and investigation. It includes a shared commitment
amongst personnel and management to personal safety responsibilities, confidence in the safety system, and a documented set of rules and policies. The
ultimate responsibility for the establishment and adherence to sound safety
practices rests with the management of the organization.
Safety Management System (SMS) A systematic approach to managing safety
within an organization, including the necessary organizational structures,
accountabilities, policies and procedures. As a minimum, an SMS:
(a) Identifies safety hazards; (b) Ensures that remedial action necessary to
maintain an acceptable level of safety is implemented; (c) Provides for continuous monitoring and regular assessment of the safety level achieved; and
(d) Aims to make continuous improvement to the overall level of safety.

Safety Promotion The component of an SMS that provides support for the
processes associated with safety risk management and safety assurance, and
defines: (a) Training and education; (b)Safety communication. See Safety Assurance, Safety Management System (SMS) and Safety Risk Management.
Safety Review Board (SRB) A strategic committee within an SMS that comprises
senior management officials; addresses high level safety issues associated with
an operator’s policies, resource allocation and organizational performance monitoring. See Safety Management System (SMS) and Safety Action Group (SAG).
Safety Risk An assessment, expressed in terms of predicted probability and
severity of the consequence(s) of a hazard to aircraft operations, with severity
using as a reference the worst foreseeable or credible outcome. See Hazard
(Aircraft Operations).
Safety Risk Management The component of a Safety Management System that
comprises: (a) Hazard identification processes; (b) Risk assessment and mitigation processes. See Safety Management System (SMS).
State Safety Program (SSP) An integrated set of regulations and activities
established by a state, aimed at managing civil aviation safety.
Organizational culture Characteristics and safety perceptions among members
interacting within a particular entity. Organizational value systems include
prioritization or balancing policies covering areas such as productivity versus
quality, safety versus efficiency, financial versus technical, professional versus
academic, and enforcement versus corrective action.
Risk mitigation The process of incorporating defenses or preventive controls to
lower the severity and/or likelihood of a hazard’s projected consequence.
In this phase, all risks that confront New Airline Ltd. are identified. A risk is an
incident or event that arises from either internal or external sources and could have
an impact on the implementation of a strategy or the achievement of objectives.
Risks can have either positive or negative effects; however, the focus of risk
management activities at New Airline Ltd. is on negative events. At this stage,
the Executive Management identifies and monitors all potential events, even if
these events have a low probability of occurrence. This is especially relevant if the
potential impact on the achievement of important objectives is high.
In order to capture all relevant risks, not just the BoD and EM members are
interviewed by the Risk Manager. All the employees of New Airline Ltd. have to be
questioned about possible risks, using a standardized questionnaire. Subsequently,
this survey can be conducted in conjunction with the annual employee performance
review.
Milestone 1: After the implementation of the risk management process all
employees, as part of their annual employee performance review, are interviewed
about possible new or worsened risks.
Phase 2: Risk Assessment
Step 1: Risk Consolidation and Classification
All identified risks are first consolidated by an interdisciplinary team composed by
the EM, and under the direction of the Risk Manager. Similar risks will be clustered
and risks without a relevant damage potential will be deleted. The risks are
classified into the following three categories: strategic risks, operational risks and
financial risks.
Strategic risks: all risks that endanger the existence or continuation of the
company or which may cause the company to go into liquidation/insolvency are
classified as strategic risks. In general, these risks relate to the long-term success
and viability of the company. These include:
 Risks which arise from disasters or force majeure situations including service
disruptions caused by natural disasters, uncertainties, service liabilities, etc.
 Environmental risks: Strong competitors negatively affecting the business.
Incorrect, untimely or unavailable information about competitors/rivals and
their products could have an adverse impact on the business.
 Management risks: In addition to having an appropriate organization, management style is one of the crucial preconditions for the success or failure of a
company. Lack of leadership (unclear instructions, unclear responsibilities) may
represent a risk to a company, such as overdependence on leading executives.


 Risks related to stakeholders: Ensure that the company is focused on the needs
and aspirations of all stakeholders, including shareholders and business partners,
authorities, suppliers and society in general.
Operational risks: Operational risks are those risks that threaten strategic goals
due to inappropriate or lack of internal processes, people or systems. In general,
these risks are short or medium-term risks and include the following:
 Process risks: Risks that relate to the customer value proposition process in the
company.
 Operational risks: Risks that arise in the daily operation, such as insufficient
resources, quality problems, illness, accidents, miscalculations, maintenance
deficiencies, etc.
 Credit risks: Risks associated with the failure of important equipment for
operations such as failure of the necessary IT infrastructure, etc.
 People and cultural risks: Risks that arise as a result of years of corporate culture
development and the people that live and work in this culture. There are several
categories of such risks, and they may take the form of resources, know-how and
skills, motivation, integrity, compensation, performance, relationship with trade
unions and legal problems.
 Legal risks: Potential for losses arising from the uncertainty of future regulations
or legal processes, such as outcomes of litigation, bankruptcy, etc.
Financial risks: Risks that have purely financial implications for the company
(short or long term) fall in this category, for example:
 Market risks: The possibility of losses arising from adverse changes in market
prices and rates, including commodity prices, interest rates and exchange rates.
 Liquidity and credit risks: Liquidity risk describes a situation in which one party
is not able to meet liabilities and debt obligations at a certain point in time. This
may affect collection, management of liquid assets, hedging and financing.
 Taxes, regulations and accounting: The accounts are subject to a thorough
examination and may be subject to substantial risks in light of existing lawsuits
and legal measures.
 Capital structure: The company does not have sufficient/optimal capital,
resulting in higher capital costs, lower profitability and a reduction in cash
flow and liquidity.
Step 2: Risk Prioritization
A workshop should be organized in order to prioritize risks in the master risks list.
Members of Executive Management from selected departments and an external
advisor all take part in this workshop. The idea is to encourage an open dialogue
about risks.
All identified risks are analyzed based on a risk priority number (RPN), which is
based on two criteria and a weighting on a scale of 1–5. The criteria are defined as:
 The impact or severity of the event (effect of risk in financial terms)
 Probability of occurrence (frequency with which these risks occur)
The risk priority number (RPN) is obtained with the multiplication of the two
risk factors. The lowest RPN is therefore 1 and the highest 25. Part of the risk

assessment is also to determine whether a risk has a relevant lead time. This is
considered as a surprise factor which is accounted for with the risk factor of 1.
The prioritization is made in the master risk list based on the determined RPN.
The master risk list should be treated as confidential by all employees. However,
it may be required to present it to insurance brokers and insurance experts in
connection with the annual insurance verification. The matrix to determine the
RPN is shown graphically below.
Disaster