MODEL

Human Factors Analysis and Classification System
Version 2.0 Jan 18

Aviation Safety Class

TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODCUTION



HFACS MODEL



EXAMPLE OF CAUSATION FACTORS



HOW TO USE HFACS MODEL

Aviation Safety Class

2

INTRODUCTION


The HFACS was developed by Scott Shappell (NTSB) and Douglas Wiegmann (US
Navy) as a comprehensive framework for investigating and analyzing aspects of
human behavior in aviation accidents.



The reason model describes the aviation industry as a complex productive system
whose product is the safe conduct of flight operations (airport, ATC operations)-



Before complex productive activities can accomplish certain preconditions need to
exist (such as well maintained equipment, well trained staff , etc-etc).



In this model each aviation industry key persons (pilots, ramp staff, ATC officers,
maintainers, etc)

rarely are independently wealthy and work in highly structured

Organizations that require effective management and careful supervision.

Aviation Safety Class

3

INTRODUCTION
 Even the best managers need guidance, personnel and money to perform their duty
safely end effectively and safe rules to follow.
 In most organizations the system function sufficiently well, but

Model of incident
causation

what about the occasion where the cog wheels do not work and
the system in not safe and efficient.

 According to Reason model accidents occur when
there are breakdown in the interactions among
the components of a productive system.
 The failures are depicted as holes in the barriers.
 These failures degrade the integrity of the system
making it more vulnerable to operational hazards
and then susceptible to catastrophic failures.

Aviation Safety Class

4

INTRODUCTION


The HFACS model incorporates the Reason Incident Causation model, which forces
investigation to focus attention to causal factors

such as latent failures and

active failures of a production system.


To best describe such latent failures and active failures HFACS uses the Unsafe Acts
taxonomy and modify slightly the pattern of incident causation.



HFACS is based on 19 causal categories within 4 levels of human failures.



These four levels of human failures are connected as follows: Organizational
influences may lead to Unsafe supervision, this lack of supervision could lead to
Preconditions for Unsafe acts, and ultimately lead to the Unsafe acts of
operators.



Within the unsafe acts level, there are errors and violations. These categories and
levels allow the errors or causal factors to be coded into the model by means of
special taxonomy, so that allowing comparison to be accomplished across the levels
of HFACS.

Aviation Safety Class

5

INTRODUCTION
Latent Failures

Latent Failures

Latent Failures
Active Failures

In HFACS model, system failures are classified as either active or latent conditions.
However, the exact nature of these failures or “holes” in the cheese have yet to
identified and described by mean of unsafe acts taxonomy.
Aviation Safety Class

6

INTRODUCTION
HFACS is based on 5 fundamental “principles.”
Principle 1: Aviation is similar in nature to other complex productive systems.
As such, the framework commonly used to describe productive systems can also be used to
understand flight operations. Using a systems approach also helps identify the underlying
causes of accidents and provides a better understanding of how system components may
interact to affect safety.

Principle 2: Human errors are inevitable within productive systems.
To err is human, and therefore we should strive to reduce the consequences of human
errors rather than preventing them.

Principle 3: Blaming an error at pilot is like blaming a mechanical failure on the aircraft.
Aircrew often serve as the last barrier that stops a sequence of events from causing an
accident. When errors do occur, they are often only a symptom of the system’s underlying
problem.

Principle 4: An accident, no matter how minor, is a failure of the system.
Systemic problems are often the cause of aircrew error and we must search the system to
determine “why” the errors occurred. We need to look at the entire sequence of events and
the multiple factors that contributed to the accident.

Principle 5: Accident investigation and error prevention go hand-in-hand.
Searching for “why” an error occurred is not to reassign blame or liability, nor even to
excuse the error, but to identify the underlying system deficiencies that might cause an
accident to occur again. Prevention, not punishment, should be our goal.
Aviation Safety Class

7

INTRODUCTION
As mentioned earlier, Reason’s model of how humans contribute to the breakdown
of safe flight operations has been incorporated into HFACS model.
In HFACS model, system failures are classified as either active or latent conditions.
However, the exact nature of these failures or “holes” in the cheese have yet to
identified and described.
In next sections, is provide a framework or taxonomy for identifying, classifying,

and organizing active and latent failures with in the system. The framework is
based upon the “The Taxonomy of Unsafe Operations”
The taxonomy describes four levels of failure within the system which include:
(a) organizational factors,
(b) unsafe supervisory practices,
(c) unsafe conditions of operators, and
(d) the unsafe acts operators commit.

Aviation Safety Class

8

INTRODUCTION
 Theoretically if at least one Failure occurs at each level this can lead to an
accident; it is therefore necessary to correct at least one of these levels
to prevent the catastrophic event; and this can only be done through a
preventive analysis of the various situations that the organization can
face.
 The HFACS model allows to analyze common trends between
different realities and this method of analysis within the American
armed forces allowed, for example, to detect that almost one third of the
incidents involving marine aviation aircraft were related to violations

routine of crews and staff; once this trend has been identified it has been
possible to reduce it considerably.

Aviation Safety Class

9

HFACS MODEL
Rather than scrutinizing the failure of a single system component, we must
take a step back and look at the entire sequence of events that lead to the
accident.
A systems perspective requires that we examine for failures throughout the
entire system. After all, it is often the failure of multiple

components that

combined together to produce an accident.

Aviation Safety Class

10

INTRODUCTION
 The approach to aircraft accidents/incidents has changed dramatically in
recent years thanks to Reason and Shappel & Weigmann's studies.

 Both

are

considered

to

be

the

Causal

Factors

of

aeronautical

accidents/incidents not only the active failures of the last operator
(Line Operations), but also the latent failure due to the wrong policies
of the Top Management and the inadequacy of the Supervisors.

 Other organizations such as FAA, NASA, USA DoD, NATO, IATA Airlines,
etc; all have implemented the HFACS system by combining it with other
previous

analysis

systems

and

giving

rise

to

slightly

different

taxonomies.

Aviation Safety Class

11

12

HFACS MODEL 1

UNSAFE
ACTS

Violations

Errors

Decision
Errors

Skill-Based
Errors

Perceptual
Errors

Routine

Exceptional

Acts are those factors that are most closely tied to the mishap, and can be
described as active failures or actions committed by the operator that
result in human error or unsafe situation.
We have identified these active failures or actions as Errors and Violations
.

Aviation Safety Class

13

HFACS MODEL 2
PRECONDITIONS
FOR
UNSAFE ACTS

Personnel
Factors

Environmental
Factors

Physical
Environment

Technological
Environment

Conditions of
Operators

Crew Resource
Mismanagement

Personal
Readiness

individuals

Adverse
Mental
States

Adverse
Physiological
States

Physical/
Mental
Limitations

Preconditions are factors in a mishap if active and/or latent preconditions
such as conditions of the operators, environmental or personnel factors
affect practices, conditions or actions of individuals and result in human
error or an unsafe situation.
Aviation Safety Class

14

HFACS MODEL 3

To give a reference to top level managerial aspects and relative
latent errors.
It was determined that a mishap event can often be traced back
to the supervisory chain of command, then the unsafe
supervision are a cause deriving from intermediate decisionmaking levels ("supervisors").

Aviation Safety Class

15

HFACS MODEL 4

ORGANIZATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONAL
INFLUENCES
INFLUENCES

Resource
Management

Organizational
Climate

Operational
Process

Organizational Influences are factors in a mishap if the
communications, actions, omissions or policies of upper-level
management directly or indirectly affect supervisory practices,
conditions or actions of the operator(s) and result in system failure,
human error or an unsafe situation.

Aviation Safety Class

16

EXAMPLE
COLLECTION OF CAUSAL FACTORS IN ACCIDENT
AND CLASSIFICATION OF LATENT AND CTIVE FAILURES

Aviation Safety Class

17

UNSAFE ACTS

e1 “The pilot deviated from the
planned flight.” the pilot
consciously chose the 310 radial”.
ERROR → DECISION ERROR
e1.1 “the pilot forgot to switch the
OBS when switching his
navigation aids to the desired
course.”
ERROR → SKILL-BASED ERROR

PRECONDITIONS FOR
UNAFE ACTS
e5. “The pilot failed to see
distinctive cloud formation”.

PERSONNEL FACTORS →
ADVERSE MENTAL STATE

e6. “The pilot significantly
misrepresented his
experience“.
PERSONNEL FACTORS →
READINESS VIOLATION

e2. “The pilot’s decision to
continue the flight into instrument
meteorological conditions (IMC)”
ERROR → VIOLATION
e3. “Failure to recognize the
significance of a cloud layer
produced by orographic
phenomenon”.
ERROR → DECISION ERROR

e4.“The pilot failed to rely on
instruments at encounter of
IMC”.
ERROR → SKILL-BASED ERROR

UNSAFE
SUPERVISIO
N

e

ORGANISATIONAL
INFLUENCE
e7. “Lack of peremployment background
check by the SAT
airline.”
RESOURCES
MANAGEMEMENT
(Organizational
policy)

HFACS MODEL
LATENT FAILURES
e7. FAA Failed to conduct background check

LATENT FAILURES

ACTIVE AND LATENT FAILURES
e5. Physical/mental limitation
e6. Misrepresented Credentials

ACTIVE FAILURES
e4. Failed to scan instruments
e2. Pilot Penetrated IMC when VMC only.

ACCIDENT & INJURY

Aircraft crashed into side
of mountain

Aviation Safety Class

19

EXAMPLE OF TAXONOMY UNSAFE ACTS

AE000 UNSAFE ACTS -> AEX00 Errors ->

AE000 UNSAFE ACTS -> AV100 Violations ->

20

How to use the HFACS MODEL
By using the HFACS framework for accident investigation, organizations are able

to identify the breakdowns within the entire system that allowed an accident to
occur.
HFACS can also be used proactively by analyzing historical events to identify
reoccurring trends in human performance and system deficiencies.
Both of these methods will allow organisations to identify weak areas and
implement targeted, data-driven interventions that will ultimately reduce accident
and injury rates.

HFACS Highlights important human factors safety issues and their relationships.
What are the holes in the swiss cheese (Reason) model ?
Aren’t they too numerous to define?
Helps target the need for specific intervention strategies.

Aviation Safety Class

21

How to use the HFACS MODEL
How can HFACS be used to prevent accidents before they occur ?
1. The HFACS is a
tool for guiding future accident investigations in
identifying common trends and for developing better accident databases,
both of which would improve the quality and accessibility of human factors
accident data.
2. Common trends within an organization can be derived from comparisons
of psychological origins of the unsafe acts, or from the latent conditions
that allowed these acts within the organization.
3. Identifying those common trends supports the identification
prioritization of where intervention is needed within an organisation.

and

4. By using HFACS, an organization can identify what hazards and where
have arisen in the near past, and implement procedures to prevent these
hazards. This will result in improved human performance and decreased
accident and injury rates.

Aviation Safety Class

22

Reference

Aviation Safety Classs
DIMEAS
Politecnico di Torino
Marco Gajetti

This document is the property and copyright of DIMEAS Politecnico di Torino. It is supplied commercially in confidence for the sole purpose of tendering for the above named
project. It shall not be copied, scanned, electronically stored or passed to any third party without the express written consent of DIMEAS Politecnico di Torino

Aviation Safety Class

23

