Structure of the Report
The next step, after determining the WHATS and WHYS of the occurrence, is to prepare the report in
which the facts are supposed to speak for themselves and the conclusions to logically flow from the text.

In order to write a good report, the investigator must acquaint the readers with the facts, conditions, and
circumstances of the occurrence in an orderly fashion, and analyse the information so that the
conclusions and recommendations can be understood.
Clarity in report writing can be enhanced by reporting sequentially. The History of the flight should describe the flight in a logical sequence from start to finish. Placing events out of
sequence tends to confuse the reader. Each sentence of the Report should be a logical unit. The writer should keep the subject of the
sentence and its verb close together. Long asides between the subject and the verb interrupt the flow

of the sentence. The information should be organised logically within each section and grouped under
an appropriate heading.

Section 1 — Factual Data Information
Factual Information, the investigator describes what happened and includes
information pertinent to the understanding of the circumstances surrounding the occurrence. This
subsection could be divided into subsection which are a tool useful to better understand the logical flow
of information. Information should:

Provide an understanding of how the occurrence happened;

Present in general terms the role of operational personnel involved and their qualifications;

Provide the facts and background of hazards identified, both related and unrelated to the causes of

the occurrence.

From a practical point of view Factual Information is accomplished also using the SHELL model
which facilitate the data collection (and classification) to used for the factual information. (SHELL
is a gathering tool in both the investigation and the presentation of factual information in the

Section 1 — Factual Data Information History of the Flight: It describes the circumstances: crew, front-line operators, ATC personnel,
ground crew, etc.
Personnel Information: It includes experience, training, qualifications, duty and rest periods of the
crew, information about operational personnel, staff, management, or regulatory personnel.

Aircraft Information: Aircraft design, certification, airworthiness, maintenance and

mass

and

balance issues are taken as object of this subsection.
Additional Information: communications, nav-aids, weather, pathological issues, etc; provides a
place to include information that cannot be readily included in any of the previous sub-sections.
In summary, throughout Section 1 of the report the deviations, discrepancies and hazards are compared
to a recognized standard or with empirical evidence.

Deloitte Consulting ATS Modello SHELL Descrizione

Analysis, Here the investigator can concentrate on developing the reasons why the
circumstances resulted in the accident, creating the bridge between factual information and conclusions.
 Having established all of the important factual issues making up the occurrence, the investigator must
then develop the causal links in the analysis section.
In the analysis part of the Report, the significance of the relevant facts and circumstances which were
presented in the factual information part should be discussed and analysed in order to determine which
events contributed to the accident.
There might be a necessity to repeat the description of some of the evidence already presented in the
factual information part, however, the analysis should not be a restatement of the facts. Also, no new
facts should be introduced in the analysis part. The purpose of the analysis is to provide a logical link between the factual information and the
conclusions that provide the answer to why the accident occurred. All reasonable hypotheses should be
stated and evaluated to demonstrate that alternative explanations of the events have been carefully
considered.

Section 2 Use of HFACS model. An effective way to present the analysis is through the use of HFACS
model. HFACS model — like the SHELL model — is a tool, and the two go hand in hand. HFACS model is
an analytical framework on which the factual information gathered by SHELL can be analysed.
HFACS fosters a systematic approach to investigation and encourages the investigator to include a

description of the conditions at the time of the occurrence, line management involvement, and the
fallible decisions of upper management and the regulator, followed by an analysis of each of these
elements in the accident sequence.
The model helps the investigator to identify the hazards (by mean of taxonomy) that combined to
create the occurrence and points the mitigation actions for redress of these hazards.
Once the causation chain has been formulated and causal hazards identified, the investigator can turn
to other hazards that were non-contributory but which nevertheless warrant safety action.
Section 3 Findings
Section 3 the Findings. Are statements of all significant conditions, events or circumstances in the
accident/incident sequence.
The findings are significant steps in the accident sequence, but they are not always causal or indicate
deficiencies. Some findings point out the conditions that pre-existed the accident sequence, but they
are usually essential to the understanding of the occurrence. The findings should be listed in a logical
sequence, usually in a chronological order.
All findings must be supported by and directly related to the factual information and the analysis. 
new factual information should be introduced in the findings.
Significant events and factors that were investigated in detail, but eliminated in the analysis, should
also be stated in the findings.


Conclusions & causes, should flow logically from the analysis, the conclusions stated
should be consistent with the analysis and all hazards should be identified appropriately.
Important conclusions may be paraphrases or duplications of the hypothesis drawn in the analysis and
findings. Investigators must be careful to use the same degrees of certainty in their conclusions as
they have established in their analyses. Some of the more likely hypotheses should be discussed, however sometimes the circumstances of
the accident are such that no firm conclusion can be drawn about causes; in that circumstances the
investigator should have no hesitation to state that the causes remain undetermined.


The expression of causes should be a concise statement of the reasons why the accident occurred
and not an abbreviated description of the circumstances of the accident.

Also, avoid the tendency to highlight the active failures of the persons closest to the event rather than
to establish a complete explanation of systemic causal factors why the accident occurred.


The safety recommendations are actions which should prevent other accidents from similar
causes or reduce the consequences of such accidents.

In order to ensure that appropriate action is taken, each safety recommendation should include a
specific addressee. Attention should be focused on the problem rather than the suggested solution.

A safety recommendation should describe the safety problem and provide justification for safety

actions, and should include a convincing presentation of the safety problem with the attendant
safety risks deriving from it. Finally it

recommended course of action for the responsible authority

to take in order to eliminate the unsafe condition.
