As evidenced by investigation records dating back to the 1940s, Human Factors are involved
in the majority of aviation accidents and incidents. Regardless of the actual percentage, there is little
disagreement among government and industry experts over the importance of Human Factors as a primary
element in the causes of accidents and incidents. In spite of this knowledge, and the notion that “to err is
human”, progress has been slow in adopting a uniform approach to the investigation of Human Factors in
aviation occurrences. When no tangible technical evidence was found to explain the occurrence, investigators
and their authorities sometimes found it difficult to deal with Human Factors issues. The unfortunate result has
been described by George B. Parker, Associate Professor of Safety at the University of Southern California,
as the Law of Exception: If we have ruled out everything except the pilot, the cause must be pilot factor.
1.2
Accident investigation reports usually depict clearly what happened and when, but in too many
instances they stop short of fully explaining how and why the accidents occurred. Attempts to identify, analyse,
and understand the underlying problems that led to the breakdowns in human performance and thus to the
accidents are sometimes inconsistent. By stating that a pilot did not follow the rules implies that the rules are
well-founded, safe, and appropriate. Hence, the investigation reports often limit conclusions to phrases such
as “pilot error”, “failed to see and avoid”, “improper use of controls”, or “failed to observe and adhere to
established standard operating procedures (SOPs).” This narrow focus is but one of many obstacles to the
effective investigation of Human Factors.
1.3

Below are listed other common obstacles, along with solutions which can eliminate them.

OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONS
Obstacle: The need to investigate Human Factors issues has not been readily accepted. One may hear
comments, such as “Human Factors is an area that is too soft”, “human nature cannot be changed”, or “it is
too difficult to prove conclusively that these factors contributed to the accident”.
Solution: More education, describing how experimental research has managed to eliminate many
speculative elements in the field of Human Factors, with scientifically supported documentation. For
example, research has shown empirically the advantages of effective cockpit communication, a
recognition that has translated directly into courses in crew resource management and pilot decisionmaking.
Obstacle: The reluctance to investigate Human Factors may stem from a lack of understanding of what the
term “Human Factors” encompasses. Unfortunately, some investigators believe themselves ill-equipped
because they are not medical doctors or psychologists. The field of Human Factors extends well beyond the
3

4

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144

physiological and the psychological; ironically, most investigators, unbeknownst to themselves, have a broad
awareness of the subject which they apply in an informal manner.
Solution: Better Human Factors training for investigators will develop a more thorough understanding
of what the investigation of Human Factors entails.
Obstacle: Investigators may mishandle questions related to the performance of crew members, air traffic
controllers, maintenance personnel, and others. This can happen when the investigator has not established
an atmosphere of objectivity and trust, and those whose performance is being questioned feel threatened by
or antagonistic towards the investigator. In the worst case, crew members or other interested parties may
withhold valuable information and assistance from the investigation authority.
Solution: Investigators should ensure that people understand the objective of the process — to
prevent recurrence — and the method by which the investigator intends to achieve this objective. If
there is a possibility of misunderstanding, this information should be discussed openly at the beginning
of the investigation.
Obstacle: There is often a natural reluctance on the part of witnesses (for the purposes of this digest these
include peers, supervisors, management and spouses) to speak candidly about the deceased. Also,
investigators may be somewhat reluctant to ask questions which may be interpreted as unfavourable by a
relative, friend or colleague.
Solution: Well planned interviews are required. By comparing the information obtained through these
interviews to information gathered by other means in the investigation process, a more complete
explanation can be achieved.
Obstacle: Balancing an individual’s right to privacy with the need to uncover and report on the factors involved
in the accident is another difficulty. On the one hand, information from the cockpit voice recorder (CVR), air
traffic control (ATC) recordings, and witness statements may be essential in determining how and why the
accident occurred. On the other hand, these same sources often contain sensitive personal information about
involved individuals who would naturally want such information protected.
Solution: Accident investigation authorities should provide a degree of protection to such sources (see
Annex 13, Chapter 5). Depending on an individual State’s laws, this protection may need to be
legislated. Investigation authorities will have to be discriminating, publishing only that information which
is essential to the understanding of the accident and which promotes prevention.
Obstacle: The investigation philosophy adopted by the management of the investigation authorities is very
important. Investigators will be hampered in their efforts to conduct a full systematic investigation if the
management for whom they work do not believe in the importance of investigating Human Factors in accidents
and incidents. Without management support, there is little doubt this field will continue to be neglected.
Solution: Knowledge of Human Factors and an understanding of how to apply this knowledge in an
investigation offers the investigation authority a greater opportunity to identify root causes which may
not have been recognized previously. Furthermore, it offers States’ administrations a constructive
means for handling controversial human performance issues. Some of the key methods by which
investigators and their managers can promote the investigation of Human Factors lie in keeping
abreast of current literature, attending Human Factors courses and seminars, and applying concepts
such as those outlined in this digest.

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144

5

Obstacle: In many States, the regulatory authority also has the responsibility for investigating accidents and
incidents. The absence of an independent investigation authority has the potential for creating a conflict of
interest within the organization. There could be an unwillingness on the part of the regulators to investigate
those issues that are related to their role as regulators. This situation could also cause the travelling public to
view the regulator’s investigative findings with scepticism.
Solution: Some States have created an independent investigative body whose sole mission is to
determine the causes of accidents and make safety recommendations to prevent their recurrence.
Such a body is free to make findings and recommendations without encumbrance.
Obstacle: The rush of media and litigants to find someone to blame to suit their own objectives may result in
premature conclusions. For example, the pilot is sometimes made the scapegoat to reassure the public that
an individual has been found responsible.
Solution: Investigators must be diligent in promoting the philosophy that only after a full, systematic
investigation has been completed can all the causes be determined.
Obstacle: The determination of conclusions and causes by the investigation authority can inadvertently
apportion blame, fault or liability. To the extent that this happens, the potential for preventing future accidents
and incidents may be diminished. How States publish their findings thus becomes a crucial part of the process
of preventing accidents.
Solution: Accident investigation reports which concentrate on identifying underlying problems instead
of laying blame will contribute far more to the prevention of accidents. However, while every effort
should be made to avoid assigning fault or liability, the reports must not refrain from reporting
objectively and fully on the causes merely because fault or liability might be inferred from the report.
Obstacle: There is a general lack of accepted international guidance material in this field.
Solution: With the publication of this digest, it is anticipated that the most significant obstacles to the
investigation of Human Factors will be eliminated. By applying the approach outlined in this digest,
investigators and their authorities should feel more confident in conducting these investigations.
1.4
Despite these obstacles, attitudes are changing. Government and industry experts are emphasizing
the value of investigating Human Factors in aviation accidents and incidents as part of the over-all aim of
accident prevention and improved safety. ICAO recognizes this change in emphasis as a positive step taken
by States to improve investigation procedures, techniques and prevention.

THE NATURE OF ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS
1.5
The investigation of Human Factors in aircraft accidents and incidents should be an integral
part of the entire investigation and its resulting report. Humans do not act alone; they are but one element of
a complex system. Often, the human is the last barrier that stops the sequence of events from causing an
accident. However, when events combine and interact together to cause a catastrophe, the investigation
authority must ensure that all elements of the complex system are investigated to understand why the accident
happened. A systematic search for the “Why” is not intended to pinpoint a single cause, nor is it intended to
assign blame or liability, nor even to excuse human error. Searching for the “Why” helps identify the underlying
deficiencies that might cause other incidents or another accident to happen.

6

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144

1.6
The formal definition of an accident is useful in determining the criteria for reporting the
occurrence to the investigation authority and in identifying when an investigation should be conducted. The
extent of an investigation will be governed by the investigation authority’s legislative mandate. The investigation
authority may not be able to investigate every occurrence in depth.

DEFINITION OF AN ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT
1.7

ICAO Annex 13, Chapter 1 defines an accident as:
“an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which takes place between the time
any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all such persons
have disembarked, in which a person is fatally or seriously injured … , the aircraft sustains
damage or structural failure … , or the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible”.

An incident (which will be discussed later) is defined as:
“an occurrence, other than an accident, associated with the operation of an aircraft which affects or
could affect the safety of operation”.

SYSTEMS APPROACH TO THE INVESTIGATION
OF HUMAN FACTORS
1.8
Having decided to initiate an investigation, the investigating authority must take an
all-encompassing view of the occurrence if it expects to fulfil the purpose of the investigation. Adopting a
systems approach to the investigation of accidents and incidents helps the investigator to identify the underlying causes in the complex air transportation system. It allows a better understanding of how various components of the system interacted and integrated to result in an accident, and in so doing points the way to
remedial action. Many different approaches exist to help investigators identify the components at work and to
analyse the information gathered. The following paragraphs present one such approach, one proposed by
James Reason1 on accident causation and depicted graphically in Figures 1-1 and 1-2.
1.9
James Reason views the aviation industry as a complex productive system. One of the basic
elements of the system consists of the decision-makers (upper management, the company’s corporate body
or the regulatory body), who are responsible for setting goals and for managing available resources to achieve
and balance two distinct goals: the goal of safety, and the goal of on-time and cost-effective transportation of
passengers and cargo. A second key element is line management — those who implement the decisions
made by upper management. For upper-management decisions and line management actions to result in
effective and productive activities by the workforce involved, certain preconditions have to exist. For example,
equipment must be available and reliable, the workforce has to be skilled, knowledgeable and motivated, and
environmental conditions have to be safe. The final element — defences or safeguards — is usually in place
to prevent foreseeable injury, damage or costly interruptions of service.

1.

James Reason, “Human Error”, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1990, p. 302. This summary of James Reason’s approach
and concepts is adapted from the original book, as well as from Captain Daniel Maurino’s review of this approach. Captain Maurino’s
paper, “Management and Flight Safety”, was presented at the ICAO Regional Flight Safety and Human Factors Seminar, in Douala,
Cameroon in May 1991.
DEFENCES
Safeguards against
foreseeable
hazards

PRODUCTIVE
ACTIVITIES
Integration of human
and mechanical
elements

PRODUCTS

PRECONDITIONS
Reliable equipment,
a skilled and
motivated workforce,
etc.
LINE MANAGEMENT
FEEDBACK
LOOPS

Operations
Maintenance
Training
etc.
DECISION-MAKERS
Plant and
corporate
management

INPUTS

Figure 1-1. The basic components of any productive system
(Source: James Reason, Human Error, 1990. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press)

1.10
Illustrated in Figure 1-2 is Reason’s model of how humans contribute to the breakdown of these
complex, interactive and well-guarded systems to produce an accident. In the aviation context, “well-guarded”
refers to the strict rules, high standards and sophisticated monitoring equipment in place. Because of
technological progress and excellent defences, accidents seldom originate exclusively from the errors of
operational personnel (front-line operators) or as a result of major equipment failures. Instead, they result from
interactions of a series of failures or flaws already present in the system. Many of these failures are not
immediately visible, and they have delayed consequences.
1.11
Failures can be of two types, depending on the immediacy of their consequences. An active
failure is an error or a violation which has an immediate adverse effect. Such errors are usually made by the
front-line operator. A pilot raising the landing gear lever instead of the flap lever exemplifies this failure type.
A latent failure is a result of a decision or an action made well before an accident, the consequences of which
may lie dormant for a long time. Such failures usually originate at the decision-maker, regulator or line
management level, that is, with people far removed in time and space from the event. A decision to merge two
companies without providing training to standardize operating procedures illustrates the latent failure. These
failures can also be introduced at any level of the system by the human condition — for example, through poor
motivation or fatigue.
1.12
Latent failures, which originate from questionable decisions or incorrect actions, although not
harmful if they occur in isolation, can interact to create “a window of opportunity” for a pilot, air traffic controller,
or mechanic to commit an active failure which breaches all the defences of the system and results in an
accident. The front-line operators are the inheritors of a system’s defects. They are the ones dealing with a
situation in which technical problems, adverse conditions or their own actions will reveal the latent failures
present in a system. In a well-guarded system, latent and active failures will interact, but they will not often
breach the defences. When the defences work, the result is an incident; when they do not, it is an accident.

ACCIDENT SCENARIO
1.13
Let us apply the main principles of Reason’s model to a complex accident scenario to provide
a better understanding of how humans contribute to a breakdown of the aviation system. The following fictitious
scenario, based on real-life events, fully illustrates all of the system components:

In the late hours of a summer Friday evening, while landing on a runway heavily contaminated with
water, a twin-engine jet transport aircraft with four crew members and 65 passengers on board overran
the westerly end of the runway at Anytown City airport. The aircraft came to rest in the mud a short
distance beyond the end of the runway. There were no injuries to crew or passengers, and there was
no apparent damage to the aircraft as a consequence of the overrun. However, a fire started and
subsequently destroyed the aircraft.

Anytown City is a popular summer resort. The predominant weather for a typical summer day is low
stratus and fog in the early morning, which gradually develops into convective cloud as the air warms.
Severe thunderstorms are common in the early afternoon and persist until the late evening hours. The
whole region where Anytown City is situated is “thunderstorm country” during summer.

The runway at Anytown is 4 520 feet long. It is a relatively wide runway with a steep downward slope
to the west. It is served by a low-power, short-range, non-directional beacon (NDB), unreliable in
convective weather. Runway lighting is low-intensity, and there are no approach lights or visual
approach aids. It is a classic “black-hole” approach during night landings.

Defences
Inadequate
Interactions
with local
events
Productive
Activities
Unsafe acts

Limited window of
accident opportunity
Preconditions
Psychological
precursors of
unsafe acts

Line Management
Deficiencies

Decisionmakers
Fallible
decisions

Active and latent failures
Active failures
Latent failures
Latent failures
Latent failures

,
showing the various human contributions to the breakdown of a complex system



The flight had originated at the airline’s main base, 400 km away. This was the second-to-last flight for
the flight crew that day. They had reported for duty at 1130 hours and were due to be relieved at 2200
hours. The crew had been flying a different schedule for the last three weeks. This was the beginning
of a new four-day schedule on another route. It had been a typical summer afternoon, with
thunderstorms throughout the entire region. Anytown City had been affected by thunderstorms during
the early afternoon. No forecast was available, and the captain had elected to delay the departure.

The flight schedule was very tight, and the captain’s decision to delay created a number of additional
delays for subsequent flights. The dispatcher working the flight did not bring to the flight crew’s
attention the need to consider a contaminated runway operation at Anytown, and did not review the
landing performance limitations with them. After a long delay, the captain decided to add contingency
fuel and depart.

Visual conditions were present at Anytown, although there were thunderstorms in the vicinity of the
airport, as well as a persistent drizzle. With no other reported traffic, they were cleared for a night visual
approach. After touchdown, the aircraft hydroplaned and overran the end of the runway slightly above
taxiing speed.

The captain was a very experienced pilot. He had been with the airline for many years, accumulating
several thousand hours of flying time as a first officer in two other types of large jet aircraft. However,
he had limited experience with the aircraft type he was flying the night of the accident. He had not had
the occasion to fly into Anytown before because the larger aircraft types he had been flying previously
did not operate into Anytown. This was his first month as a captain. He was a well-balanced individual,
with no personal or professional behavioural extremes.

At the time of the accident the first officer was very inexperienced. He had recently been hired by the
airline and had only been flying the line for about a month. He had flown into Anytown on two other
occasions with another captain, but only during the day. His training records indicated standard
performance during induction into the airline’s operations.
Initially, the investigation would focus on determining what actually happened at Anytown. It
was learned that it had rained heavily at the airport and that there was standing water on the runway. Readout
of the flight recorders disclosed that the captain flew the approach with excess airspeed which resulted in the
airplane touching down smoothly, but well beyond the touchdown zone, and then hydroplaning off the end. It
was also determined that the captain neglected to consult the performance charts in the aircraft flight manual
for the correct landing distance on a wet runway. Also, the first officer did not make the required callouts during
the approach.
These unsafe flight crew actions could in and of themselves explain the overrun and focus the
investigation on a conclusion of “crew error” as a cause for the accident. However, if one were to investigate
further into the company’s operational procedures and practices and look upstream for other factors influencing
the crew’s performance, one could identify additional active and latent failures which were present during the
flight. So the investigation should not stop at the point where the crew made errors.

If the investigation were to determine whether any other unsafe acts occurred in the operation,
it would discover that not only did the dispatcher fail to brief the captain on potential problems at the airport (as
required by company procedure), but that the company’s agent at Anytown had not reported to the dispatcher
at headquarters that heavy rain had fallen. Inspection of the runway revealed poor construction, paving and
lack of adequate drainage. It was also discovered that maintenance and inspection of the NDB was not in

accordance with prescribed procedures. Over the past month, other flight crews had reported on several
occasions that the ground aid had given erratic indications during instrument approaches; no attempt had been
made to rectify the problem.

With these facts in mind and by referring to the Reason model, it can be seen that the actions
of other front-line operators were also unsafe and had an influence upon the performance of the flight crew and
the outcome of the flight. These activities can be classified as active failures and are also linked to linemanagement and decision-makers’ performance.

Next, the investigation should determine if there were any adverse pre-conditions under which
the flight crew had to operate. These can be listed as follows: 1) a night non-precision instrument approach to
an unfamiliar airport; 2) a poorly lit, short, wide and steeply sloping runway; 3) poor runway pavement and
drainage; 4) a lack of reliable information on the performance of the NDB; 5) a lack of reliable information about
the wind conditions; 6) a flight schedule which allowed only a 15-minute turnaround at Anytown; 7) an arrival
delayed by two hours, compromising crew duty-time requirements; 8) an aircraft not equipped with thrust
reversers; 9) an inadequately trained flight crew, inexperienced in the type of aircraft and at the airport; and
10) inadequate crash, fire, and rescue services.
1.19
The Reason model classifies these pre-conditions as latent failures, many of which lay dormant
for some time before the accident and which were the consequences of line management and decision-maker
actions or inactions. For example, pairing two pilots who were inexperienced in the type of aircraft and allowing
the captain to operate into an unfamiliar airport with a non-precision approach procedure was the result of
unsafe decisions made by line management. Also, the failure to follow up on reported discrepancies with the
NDB and the failure to conduct adequate inspections of the airport indicate either a lack of awareness of the
safety implications or a tolerance of hazards by the decision-maker’s line management and the regulatory
authority. The investigation found that pilots were not briefed on the use of performance charts for
contaminated runways, nor did they practice hydroplaning avoidance techniques. These discrepancies can be
attributed to both line and upper management’s failure to provide adequate training.
1.20
At the roots of this occurrence were other “fallible decisions” made by both upper management
levels within the company and in the regulatory authorities. Management had decided to operate a scheduled
service at an airport with known deficiencies in facilities (poor lighting and approach aids, inadequate weather
services). More importantly, they chose to operate without the required level of crash, fire and rescue services
available at the airport. In addition, management selected this type of airplane for this route out of marketing
and cost considerations, despite its unsuitability for all-weather operations at Anytown. Compounding the
problem was the decision by the regulatory authority to certify the airport for scheduled air transport operations
in spite of its significant safety deficiencies.
1.21
In Figure 1-3, the active and latent failures identified in this accident are depicted using
Reason’s model. The model portrays the interactive nature of the failures and how they defeated the defences
that one might expect to find within this organizational and operational environment. It also depicts the critical
importance of identifying latent failures as they relate to the prevention of future accidents.
1.22
In summary, this approach to the investigation of Human Factors encourages the investigator
to go beyond the unsafe actions of front line operators to look for hazards that were already present in the
system and which could contribute to future occurrences. This approach has direct implications for the
prevention activities of operators and regulators, who must identify and eliminate or control latent failures.



Interactions
with local
events

poor crew co-ordination
ineffective dispatch briefing
poor crash, fire, rescue facilities

Productive
Activities
Unsafe act

inappropriate landing technique
failure to consult performance charts
inadequate dispatch briefing
Preconditions
Psychological
precursors of
unsafe acts

limited approach and airport facilities
night approach
inadequate route/airport qualification
no weather forecast/poor weather report
tight schedule

deficient training programme
improper crew pairing
poor co-ordination between dispatch
and flight operations

company selection o faircraft type
regulatory authority airport certification

Limited window of
accident opportunity

Line Management
Deficiencies

Decisionmakers
Fallible
decisions

Active and latent failures
Active failures
Latent failures


1.23
Most accidents, such as the Anytown one, originate in actions committed by reasonable,
rational individuals who were acting to achieve an assigned task in what they perceived to be a responsible
and professional manner.2 These and other individuals had probably committed these same unsafe acts before
without negative consequences because the conditions existing at the time did not favour the interaction of
flawed decisions or deficiencies present in the system. Under different circumstances, the consequences of
the Anytown situation might have been an incident rather than an accident.

Many incidents occur every day which may or may not require reporting by the investigation
authority; some come very close to being accidents. Because there is no injury or little damage, these incidents
might not be investigated. The need for an investigation by either the investigation authority or the operator
must be emphasized, however, because an incident investigation can often produce better accident prevention
results than can an accident investigation.
1.25
In an incident, injury, damage and liability are generally reduced, and there is less associated
publicity. As a result, more information is available and the atmosphere is less adversarial. Investigators and
Human Factors specialists have a better opportunity to identify the underlying human performance issues
involved. There is thus more likelihood of determining why the incidents occurred and, equally, how the
defences in place prevented them from becoming accidents.
1.26
Knowledge of incidents, whether they are investigated in depth or not, provides significant
insight into accident prevention. This realization has led to the establishment of several confidential safety
deficiency reporting systems, and the evidence emerging from these constitutes a rich source of data on
Human Factors in aviation.


An accident or incident is not solely the result of an action taken by one individual. The
potential for an accident is created when human actions and latent failures present within an organization or
the air transport system interact in a manner which breaches all of the defences.
1.28
The purpose of investigating Human Factors is to identify why actions lead to the breakdown
in defences and result in accidents. This requires determining the related latent failures present at all levels
of the organization (including the upper levels of management) and of the aviation system of which it is a part.
It goes without saying that it is equally important to determine how these unsafe actions could have been
prevented. We cannot prevent humans from making errors, but we can reduce the frequency of these errors
and limit their consequences. This is the essence of prevention activities and highlights the importance of
investigation and reporting of incidents.

The investigation of Human Factors is an integral part of the investigation of an accident or
incident. The collection and analysis of Human Factors information should be just as methodical and complete
as the collection and analysis of information pertaining to the aircraft, its systems, or any of the other traditional
areas of investigation. The size and scope of the investigation of Human Factors will depend on the circumstances of the occurrence; it can involve one investigator who may also be responsible for all other aspects
of the investigation, or one or more investigators dedicated solely to the investigation of Human Factors.
Whether the investigation is large or small, many of the guidelines in this digest apply to both situations. The
success of the investigation into Human Factors will depend on how well it is integrated and co-ordinated with
the other elements of the investigation, and will require effective and efficient management of available
resources through the application of basic management principles. The investigation itself should be viewed
as a process requiring trained and disciplined investigators who apply skills in a systematic way.
2.2
This chapter provides guidelines to be used to integrate the investigation of Human Factors
with the over-all investigation. It will look at who should conduct the investigation — a single investigator or a
team — and outline what information should be collected, where to find it and how to analyse it.

Most accidents and incidents are investigated by investigators who are trained as generalists.
For years, these generalists have been investigating highly technical and complex aspects of occurrences,
including areas of Human Factors. Where necessary, specialists are consulted to provide specific assistance
and guidance, but by and large the data gathering and analysis are conducted by the generalist investigators.
ICAO sees no reason why this principle should not continue to apply to the investigation of Human Factors in
aviation occurrences.
2.4
In view of the growing complexities of aviation, investigators must be knowledgeable of and
skilled in the application of Human Factors principles and sound data-gathering and analysis techniques. They
need not be physicians, psychologists, sociologists or ergonomists. The essential qualifications of a good
Human Factors investigator are those of any good investigator. As outlined in ICAO’s Manual of Aircraft
Accident Investigation (Doc 6920), investigators must possess a sound working knowledge of aviation and of
the factors which affect operations as a whole. This knowledge must be complemented by technical skill, an
inquisitive nature, dedication, diligence, patience, humility, integrity and logic. The measure of the good Human
Factors investigator is not his or her professional qualifications in behavioural sciences, but rather the ability
to determine, with the help of specialists if necessary, what information is relevant, to ask the right questions,
to listen to the answers and to analyse the information gathered in a logical and practical way.
2.5
In order to adequately prepare generalist investigators to investigate Human Factors, it is
essential that they receive appropriate training. Such training should include guidance on the interdisciplinary
14

nature of this type of investigation, fundamental areas of examination, data that should be collected, data
sources, data collection methods including interview techniques, and analysis techniques. Training should also
include general guidance on the type of specialists who are available to assist, where they can be found and
when it would be appropriate to employ them. Given this level of training, the experienced accident investigator
should be able to conduct all but the most specialized aspects of the Human Factors investigation.
THE SINGLE INVESTIGATOR
2.6
The single investigator assigned to investigate an accident or incident has the challenge of
setting priorities and managing available time to cover effectively all areas of the investigation, including
Human Factors.
2.7
As in any investigation, it is important for the investigator to take immediate steps to preserve
evidence at the site and elsewhere. The single investigator will probably rely heavily on other authorities such
as the police or airport officials. Good preplanning of the response is needed; the Manual of Aircraft Accident
Investigation provides detailed guidance in this area. Once these initial steps have been taken, the investigator
can begin to organize the investigation with the reasonable expectation that information which could be significant to its outcome, including areas of Human Factors, will be available for examination and analysis. At the
outset, high priority must be assigned to the collection of information or evidence likely to disappear or to be
forgotten, disturbed or unavailable soon after the accident.
2.8
The single investigator will also need to plan and prioritize the remaining work. Periodic
assessments of progress are particularly important for the single investigator if precious time and resources
are to be used effectively.
THE HUMAN FACTORS INVESTIGATOR
2.9
When one investigator on a team is assigned to conduct the Human Factors portion of an
investigation, the organizational task is less complex but the same basic principles apply. There must be close
co-operation and interaction with all other investigation team members, as much of the information and data
relevant to the investigation of the Human Factors aspects will actually be collected by investigators working
in other areas.
THE HUMAN FACTORS GROUP
2.10
Depending on the circumstances of the accident, it may be desirable to establish a Human
Factors Group under the direction of the Investigator-in-charge. Normally, such groups are established as a
part of a large investigative team effort in response to a complex major aircraft accident. Although any
investigator on the team may have some role in the investigation of Human Factors, the Human Factors group
is responsible for co-ordinating the investigation of the human performance elements, ensuring that appropriate
and sufficient data are collected, and synthesizing the results in a meaningful way.
2.11
The composition of the Human Factors Group will be governed by the nature of the occurrence.
Because individuals whose performances are being examined are usually pilots, air traffic controllers,
maintenance engineers, dispatchers, and operations managers, similarly qualified individuals are well suited
to participate in the examination. As the investigation progresses, it may be advisable to alter the composition
of the Human Factors Group, or to combine groups to provide sufficient expertise in relevant areas under
examination.

16

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144

2.12
Information collected by other members of the investigation team (such as operations, air traffic
control, structures, systems, power plants, flight recorders, aircraft performance, etc.) is also required to
reconstruct the sequence of events before actions and the performance of the front-line operators involved can
be examined thoroughly. The Human Factors group must be able to rely on the assistance and expertise of
these other groups.

WHAT INFORMATION SHOULD BE COLLECTED?
2.13
In general, the data that must be collected fall into two broad areas: information which will
enable investigators to construct a detailed chronology of each significant event known to have occurred prior
to and, if appropriate, following the occurrence (this chronology must place particular emphasis on the
behavioural events, and what effect they may have had on the accident events sequence); and information
which will permit investigators to make reasonable inferences about factors which may have influenced or
motivated a particular accident-producing behaviour. In terms of the Reason model, this is information which
describes the “pre-conditions” under which front-line operators were working.
2.14
In addition, other information may be needed for statistical or other special purposes.
Investigators must follow national guidelines as well as those of ICAO (see ICAO’s Accident/Incident Reporting
Manual, Doc 9156) to meet such requirements.
2.15
Investigators must collect information which encompasses the decisions, actions and
behaviour of all the people concerned with the occurrence — not only front-line operators. Investigators must
also identify the conditions under which these decisions, actions and behaviour were carried out. These
conditions would include the organizational structure and the policies, procedures and practices under which
activities were performed. It is through such an approach that a full understanding can be gained of how the
“window of opportunity” for an accident or incident was created.


In addition to Reason’s model, the conceptual SHEL model will facilitate the data collection
task by providing a systematic approach to identifying problems (see ICAO Human Factors Digest No. 1 for
a complete description of the SHEL model). First developed by Professor Edwards in 1972, and later modified
by Hawkins (see Figure 2-1), it is an expanded version of the man-machine-environment model in ICAO’s
Accident Prevention Manual (Doc 9422). The SHEL model addresses the importance of human interaction and
the use of written information and symbology, and helps the investigator apply the Reason model on accident
causation, which treats the accident as an outcome of a series of interactive and enabling events.
2.17
Each component of the SHEL model (software, hardware, environment, liveware) represents
one of the building blocks of Human Factors studies. The liveware, or the human element, is the centrepiece
of the model, representing the most critical and flexible component. It does have limitations, however, most
of which are predictable in general terms.
2.18
The central human component does not act on its own; it interacts directly with each of the
others. The edges of this human block are not simple and straight, so other blocks must be carefully matched
to them if stress and eventual breakdown (an accident) are to be avoided. The investigation of Human Factors
must identify where mismatches between components existed and contributed to the occurrence, and so the
data collected during the investigation should permit a thorough examination and analysis of each of the SHEL
components.


In this model the match or
mismatch of the blocks (interface)
is just as important as the
characteristics of the blocks
themselves. A mismatch can be
a source of human error.

The following description of the components and interfaces will help investigators collect data
to achieve a thorough Human Factors investigation. Where appropriate, data from the Anytown scenario are
included.

Liveware — the individual
The liveware component — the individual — is the centrepiece of the SHEL model. The data
that should be collected to address this central component can be broken down into four categories: physical,
physiological, psychological and psychosocial.
Physical factors deal with the physical capabilities and limitations of the individual. Included are the
individual’s anthropometric (basic physical) attributes, physical condition, physical strength, motor skills and
visual, auditory and other senses.
Task — Determine:

was the individual physically capable of performing the required task?


what physical impediments or limitations to successful performance were present? and

how did these physical or sensory limitations create difficulties or illusions that affected the
task?

Anytown: The investigation did not disclose any evidence of physical factors that would have played
a role in degrading the performance of the captain, first officer, or other operator.

Physiological factors deal with the individual as a complex organism encompassing a large array of systems.
Included are the individual’s general health, as well as nutrition, disease, tobacco, alcohol or drug use, stress
and fatigue levels, and general lifestyle considerations.
Task — Determine:

was the individual physiologically fit to perform the required task?

how did physiological fitness influence the individual’s performance and judgement?

how did the individual’s ability to handle stress, fatigue or disease affect actions,
behaviours and judgement? and

was the individual affected by any type of physiological deprivation?
Anytown: Other than the suggestion that fatigue and stress would be factors to consider, the
investigation did not reveal any evidence of other physiological factors that might have adversely
affected the crew’s or other operators’ performance.
Psychological factors determine what individuals bring with them to work situations as a result of their
acquired knowledge and experience and their mental capabilities. Included are training, knowledge, experience
and planning; perceptions, information processing, attention span and workload; personality, mental and
emotional state, attitudes and mood.
Task — Regarding training, knowledge, experience and planning, determine:
was the individual’s training, knowledge and experience sufficient, relevant and applicable
to the situation?
how did the nature and recency of the experience, training, or knowledge influence the
individual’s self-confidence, ability to complete the actions or perceived level of workload?

Task — Regarding perceptions, information processing, attention span and workload, determine:
was there an inaccurate perception or mental representation of the task to be performed?
did the individual suffer from any misperceptions, delayed perceptions, or illusions caused
either by the visual or vestibular system or by circumstances surrounding the flight?
did the level of attention required or the amount of information to be processed exceed the
individual’s own limitations?

did the individual’s ability to handle the events cause biases in judgement and change the
perceived workload level?

Task — Regarding personality, mental and emotional state, attitudes and mood, determine:

was the individual psychologically fit for the task?

what do the facts indicate about the individual’s attitudes towards work, others and self?

how did these attitudes influence motivation, quality of work and judgement?
how did personality and mental state influence the individual’s approach to the situation?

how did the individual’s ability to cope with stress and to respond to emergencies influence
the event sequence?

Anytown: The evidence suggests that several areas should be examined more closely. These areas
are training and knowledge, perceptions, information processing, workload and perhaps attitude.
Although it was reported initially that the captain was a well-balanced individual with no personal or
professional behavioural extremes, it would be useful to gather more information concerning his ability
to handle the captain’s higher level of responsibility. The fact that he had not yet flown with other first
officers would, however, make an assessment of his performance as a captain difficult. Examination
of some of these psychological factors would also apply to the first officer, the dispatcher and the
Anytown agent.
Psychosocial factors deal with the pressures brought to bear on an individual by the social system (non-work
environment). Included are events and stresses (e.g. a death in the family or financial problems) as well as
relationships with others (family, friends and peers).

did psychosocial factors motivate or influence the individual’s approach to a situation or the
ability to handle stress or unforseen events? did they contribute to the degree of fatigue
experienced?

Anytown: The investigation did not reveal any evidence of psychosocial factors having had a negative
effect on the flight crew’s actions. However, the Anytown company agent had been separated from his
family for an extended period, a situation which had lowered his motivation.

Liveware-liveware interface

The liveware-liveware interface is the relationship between the individual and any other
persons in the workplace. Staff-management relationships also fall within the scope of this interface, as
corporate climate and company operating pressures can significantly affect human performance. Data requirements span such subjects as human interactions, communication (verbal and non-verbal) and visual signals.

did the interaction or communications with other people in the work environment influence
the performance of individuals, their attitudes, their level of stress, their perceived task
demands and workload levels?

did verbal and non-verbal communication, or the lack thereof, influence the sequence of
actions in an inappropriate or irreversible manner? did visual signals replace, support or contradict oral information?
how would you evaluate the crew’s interactions and compatibility in terms of personality,
experience level and working habits?
how did the crew work together; how did they make use of their resources?
did management policies regarding personnel issues affect working conditions,
experience and knowledge level of employees?

were policies and standards existing, available, current and adequately implemented,
accepted, monitored or supervised?

how did the supervisor-employee ratio influence the operation?

what was the union’s influence on policies, workers and management?

what kind of operational environment did management promote, and how did it affect
employees’ decision-making and choice of actions?

There is ample evidence that the liveware-liveware interfaces should be explored, starting
with those between the flight crew, the captain and the dispatcher, and between the dispatcher and
the company agent in Anytown. Additional interrelationships to be examined include personnel in the
training department, the company’s check pilots and line management in the training and operations
departments.

Liveware-hardware interface
The liveware-hardware interface represents the relationship between the human and the
machine. Data requirements span such subjects as cockpit and workstation configuration, display and control
design, and seat design and configuration.
Task — Determine:
how did interactions between the individual and the equipment influence informationprocessing capabilities?

how did design or layout influence response time, action sequencing, habit patterns,
workload or orientation?

Anytown: There are some physical features of the aircraft which could have been factors in the
accident. Activation of its alternate braking system requires abnormal body movements. Deployment
of the ground spoilers requires using handles on the thrust levers which are similar to thrust reverser
handles. In addition, it is known that, because of its lower-pressure tires, this aircraft is more prone to
hydroplaning than are the other types on which the captain was more experienced.)

Liveware-software interface
The liveware-software interface reflects the relationship between the individual and supporting
systems found in the workplace. Data requirements span such subjects as regulations, manuals, checklists,
publications, standard operating procedures and computer software design.
Task — Determine:

were manuals, checklists, maps, or any written documents readily available? adequate?
used?

were the format, content and vocabulary used consistent from one document to another?
were they easy to understand and use, logical and appropriate?


how did written or computerized information induce errors, influence response time or
generate confusion?


how did computer displays and keyboard compatibility cause confusion, influence
response time or hide blatant errors?

how did automation affect the individual’s actions and workload, work conditions, attitudes
towards work and mental representation of the task?

Anytown: The evidence points to several potential problems regarding the adequacy of training
material, quick-reference data pertaining to the landing performance of the aircraft on contaminated
runways, training information, manuals and checklists for dispatchers and agents, etc.

Liveware-environment interface
2.24
The liveware-environment interface is the relationship between the individual and the internal
and external environments. The internal environment is that of the immediate work area, including temperature,
ambient light, noise and air quality. The external environment includes both the physical environment outside
the immediate work area as well as the broad political and economic constraints under which the aviation
system operates. Data requirements include weather, terrain and physical facilities, infrastructure and
economic situation.
Task — Determine:
were there any environmental factors which might have led the individual to take shortcuts
or make biased decisions or which might have created illusions by affecting vestibular,
visual or auditory perceptions?
were there any indications that the weather or dispatch, hangar, gate, or aerodrome
infrastructure caused delays leading to shortcuts, reduced safety margins or limitations on
the individual’s choice of actions?

were there economic or regulatory pressures which biased decision-making?

There is evidence that the external environment in which the flight crew were operating could
have contributed to visual illusions during the instrument approach. Weather conditions played a role
in the captain’s decision to delay the flight and degraded the stopping performance of the airplane.
Also, the runway layout and condition was conducive to standing water. There were problems with
dispatch and there was probably induced pressure on the captain to land at the airport on the first
approach because he had delayed the flight schedule substantially. This latter factor should also be
taken into account under physiological factors (potential stress).

HOW MUCH INFORMATION IS ENOUGH?
In conducting the investigation of Human Factors, the question “how much data is enough?”
frequently arises. How many peers, relatives and supervisors of the pilot should be interviewed? How far back
in time should personal activities be investigated? To what extent should interpersonal relationships (including
spousal) be examined? At what point does past behaviour cease to influence current behaviour? How high in
management should the investigation progress?


In dealing with Human Factors issues, the dividing line between relevancy and irrelevancy is
often blurred. Data that initially may seem to be unrelated to the occurrence, could prove to be extremely
relevant after relationships between particular events or elements have been established. Clearly, good judgement is necessary in order to determine the relevancy of information obtained during the investigation.

It has often been said that accident investigators only gather facts during the course of their
investigation and do not analyse until all the facts, conditions and circumstances of the accident have been
obtained. While this may appear to be an objective approach to an investigation, it is not realistic. “Actually,
nothing is more detrimental to the field phase of an investigation than the pretence that all pertinent facts can
be discovered without a selective, analytical process.” 1 Although a standardized methodology has not been
adopted, investigators have recognized the necessity for some form of ongoing reasoning process.
G.M. Bruggink describes the analytical reasoning process as theorizing — “to arrive by reasoning at possible explanations of known or suspected accident facts.” He states that the reasoning process forms
the basis for the development and integration of promising avenues of investigation, and suggests that the level
of confidence placed on these explanations will depend on the weight of the available evidence.2

Clearly, there is a limit to how far the investigation of Human Factors can or should go. Pursuit
of these aspects of the investigation in the interests of academic research is not the purpose of the investigation and may be counterproductive. Investigators should also remember that it is not necessary for the facts,
analysis and conclusions of investigators to stand the test of a court of law, for this is the purpose of judicial
inquiry and not accident prevention. The available investigative resources must also be considered when
determining the depth and detail of information to be collected. Resource limitations may mean that investigative efforts may concentrate on only the principal individuals, and that fewer data may be collected on the
more peripheral individuals involved in an occurrence.
2.30
Finally, in determining the depth and detail of information to collect, the purpose of investigating
Human Factors must not be forgotten. The task is to explain how the causal event sequence was initiated and
why it was not interrupted before the mishap — WHY, not who was to blame. If the data does not help to
explain these questions, then it is not relevant.

USE OF CHECKLISTS

Checklists are not strict protocols for the rigid step-by-step conduct of an investigation of
Human Factors, but are instead useful aids in organising and conducting the investigation of Human Factors.
They can help verify the thoroughness of the investigation of the relevant Human Factors issues, and assist
the investigator to organise and prioritise the gathering of evidence. However, since most occurrences are by
nature unique and diverse, investigators must be flexible in their use of checklists.
2.32
Numerous checklists have been prepared by different investigation organisations. Three
examples are shown in Appendix 1: the first example was designed to assist investigators in focusing investigation and analysis on the most relevant areas; the second example provides a more detailed breakdown of
information to be collected, based on the SHEL model; the third example was designed to assist investigators
in developing an understanding of the personnel selection, training and experience issues relevant to the
occurrence under investigation.
Information relevant to an aviation occurrence can be acquired from a variety of sources.
Primary sources relating specifically to Human Factors include hardware evidence, paper documentation, audio
and flight recorder tapes and interviews, direct observation of aviation personnel activities and simulations.
Secondary sources include aviation occurrence data bases, reference literature and Human Factors
professionals and specialists.

Hardware evidence is most often associated with the aircraft but may also involve other work
stations and equipment used by aviation personnel (eg. air traffic controllers, aircraft maintenance and
servicing personnel). Specific sources include aircraft wreckage, similarly configured aircraft, manufacturer’s
data, company records and logs, maintenance and servicing equipment, air traffic control facilities and
equipment, etc.
2.35
Paper documentation spans the complete spectrum of SHEL interfaces. Specific sources
include: personal records and logbooks; certificates and licenses; company personnel and training records;
aircraft flight manuals; company manuals and standard operating procedures; training manuals and syllabi;
company training and operational schedules; regulatory authority records; weather forecasts, records and
briefing material; flight planning documents; medical records; medical and post-mortem examinations (see the
ICAO Manual of Civil Aviation Medicine, Doc 8984).
2.36
Flight data recordings and ATC radar tapes are invaluable sources of information for
determining the sequence of events and examining the liveware-liveware and liveware-hardware interfaces.
Within airlines using flight recorder monitoring programmes, there can be a wealth of information about crews’
normal operating procedures. In addition to traditional flight data recordings, new-generation aircraft have
maintenance recorders and some electronic components with non-volatile memories that are also potential
sources of pertinent information. Audio (ATC and CVR) recordings are invaluable sources of information about
the liveware-liveware and liveware-hardware interfaces. In addition to preserving personnel communications,
audio recordings can also provide evidence on the state of mind of individuals, and possible stress or fatigue.
It is essential, therefore, that persons familiar with the crew listen to the recordings to confirm the identity of the
speaker (if hot microphones are not used) and to indicate any anomalies in speech pattern or style.
2.37
Interviews conducted with individuals both directly and indirectly involved in the occurrence
are also important. Examples of individuals from whom interviews may be required are:

survivors (flight and cabin crew or passengers), next of kin, neighbours, friends, colleagues,
air traffic controllers, eyewitnesses

ground handlers, dispatchers, weather briefers, aircraft maintenance engineers, baggage
handlers, de-icing personnel

company owner, chief of flight operations, chief pilot, chief instructor, check-pilot, supervisor,
former employers, training captains

chief of maintenance, maintenance engineers, technical specialists, regulatory authorities

family or personal physician, psychologist, aeromedical examiner.

Knowledge gleaned from such interviews can be used to confirm, clarify or supplement data from other
sources. In the absence of measurable data, interviews become the single source of information, and
investigators therefore need to be skilled in interviewing techniques. Direct observation of actions performed by aviation personnel in the real environment can
reveal important information about Human Factors. Observations can be made of flight operations activities,
flight training activities, maintenance activities and air traffic control activities.
2.39
Simulations permit reconstruction of the occurrence and can facilitate a better understanding
of the sequence of events which led up to it, and of the context within which personnel perceived the events.
Computer simulations can be used to reconstruct events by using data from flight recorders, air traffic control
tapes and other physical evidence. Often a session in an aircraft flight simulator or reconstruction of a flight in
a similar aircraft can offer valuable insights.

Not all Human Factors factual information is gathered in the field. After the field phase of the
investigation, additional information about Human Factors may be collected, facilitating analysis of the factual
information collected in the field. These empirical data come from several sources.

Basic psychological and sociological references can be good sources of information about
general human performance, but they seldom address human behaviour in conditions comparable to the
aviation operational environment. In recent years, professionals in the Human Factors field have provided
some valuable material addressing aviation operational issues, and Appendix 5 to this digest lists a number
of relevant reference documents. Some aviation research agencies will, on request, provide literature review
services on selected topics.

At any time during an investigation, investigators must be willing to consult professionals
outside their area of expertise. These professionals include, but are not restricted to:

medical officers — to analyse the impact of any medical condition found in the flight crew or
other relevant personnel;


psychologists — to help analyse the impact of environmental, operational and situational
factors on motivation and behaviour

sociologists — to help evaluate the factors that affect interactions and performance;



sleep researchers and professionals — to evaluate the quality of rest available to the
individual, and the impact on performance of a particular work-rest duty cycle or of circadian
factors; and

ergonomists — to assess the effect of design and layout on the user.


how to assess relevancy of certain behaviour or actions deemed abnormal or non-standard;


how to weigh sensitivity and privacy considerations;


how to avoid speculation.


For example, if an investigation revealed that a pilot made an error leading to an accident, and
if conditions conducive to fatigue, or a distracting conversation, or evidence of complacency were present, it


does not necessarily follow that the error was made because of these conditions. There will inevitably be some
degree of speculation involved in arriving at the conclusions, and their viability is only as good as the reasoning
process used by the investigator and the weight of evidence available.
Because it involves probabilities and likelihoods, inductive reasoning is less precise than
deductive reasoning. (In this context, “probability” is not meant to imply the precision of mathematical probability; instead, it is used in the way a lay speaker might state some conclusion as being certain, probable,
possible or unknown). Inferences are drawn on the most probable or most likely explanations of behavioural
events, and a conclusion reached by inductive reasoning cannot be tested conclusively. Inductive conclusions
can be challenged, depending on the weight of evidence supporting them. Accordingly, they must be based
upon a consistent and accepted reasoning method.
To ensure that all reasonable possibilities are considered while at the same time reducing the
investigator’s task to manageable levels, the Australian Bureau of Air Safety Investigation has successfully
applied the following similar step-by-step reasoning process to deal with the less tangible Human Factors
evidence. In the following discussion, “empirical knowledge” refers to experimental findings which have gained
general acceptance within the Human Factors research community. It is assumed that the investigator has a
sound basic knowledge of Human Factors, and that the evidence gathered in the investigation is complete.

The first step in the process is aimed at establishing the probability of the existence of some
Human Factors condition.

Considering all of the evidence available, establish what Human Factors issues should be
considered.
Anytown: After applying a checklist, the investigator decided that there was at least some
evidence of 17 different Human Factors issues, such as: fatigue, misinterpretation of visual
cues, inadequate information flow, training deficiencies, scheduling pressure, confusing control
layout, cockpit lighting, stress, distractions, etc.

Weighing the relative importance of all of these possibilities, determine those issues that
should be examined in detail.
After examining the 17 possible factors, the investigator decided that some, such as
cockpit lighting, were not important. There remained 9 issues requiring examination in detail.

Establish what is empirically known about each of these issues and the underlying causes.
Anytown: The investigator reviewed Human Factors reference material to confirm what is
known about the 9 key issues; a human performance specialist provided advice on visual
illusions.

Compare the circumstances of the occurrence against the empirical knowledge.
Anytown: Evidence pertaining to the 9 key issues was compared to the corresponding
reference material.


Determine the probability that one or more of these Human Factors conditions existed.
Anytown: Visual illusion was determined to be highly probable as a factor in the accident
because of the conditions that existed and the flight path of the aircraft.

The second step is aimed at establishing the probability that a particular Human Factors
condition influenced the sequence of events leading to an occurrence.

Examine what is empirically known about the effects of the Human Factors conditions
determined in Step 1 to exist.
Anytown: The visual illusion which the pilot was probably experiencing (black hole) has been
studied extensively and is known to cause a characteristic approach path.

Compare the actions and performance of the people involved in the occurrence against the
empirical knowledge.
Anytown: The initial approach path recorded on the flight data recorder closely matched the
typical black hole approach path. Cockpit voice recorder evidence showed that the crew
believed that the approach path was accurate.


Determine the probability that the actions and performance of personnel were affected by the
Human Factors conditions which existed.
Anytown: “At the time of the occurrence, the pilot-in-command probably experienced a visual
illusion induced by the absence of visual cues on the night approach.” Note the use of
qualifying probability language. It was concluded that the captain misjudged the initial
approach path because of the illusion.

Determine the probability that the condition did contribute to the sequence of events leading
to the occurrence.
Anytown: Late in the approach the crew detected that they were below the desired approach
path. In their attempts to reestablish a safe approach path they built up excessive airspeed,
which contributed to the overrun. “It is probable that the visual illusion contributed to the pilot’s
misjudgement of the approach path.”


The steps outlined above rely on an accumulation of evidence which may not allow indisputable conclusions to be drawn, but which will often allow conclusions of probability. In some ways the use of
conclusions of probability is similar to the legal profession’s use of circumstantial evidence, requiring the
development and testing of hypotheses. The strength of this approach is that it forces the investigator to draw
conclusions in a systematic way on the basis of empirical knowledge and verifiable evidence from which there
are no indisputable conclusions, and ensures that the investigator considers all likely factors.

The analysis of Human Factors must take into account the accident prevention objective of
the investigation. It has been established that occurrences are seldom the result of a single cause. Thus, if the
accident prevention aim of an investigation is to be achieved, the Human Factors analysis must acknowledge
that although individual factors may seem insignificant when viewed in isolation, they can produce a sequence
of unrelated events that combine to produce an accident. The view of an interactive aviation industry system
suggested by James Reason provides an excellent framework from which investigators can achieve a thorough
analysis of Human Factors at all levels. The Human Factors analysis must not focus on the active failures of
front-line operators alone but must include an analysis of the fallible decisions at all levels which interacted to
create the “window of opportunity” for an accident to occur.

Having completed the gathering and analysis of the relevant facts, the investigator must
prepare the report of the investigation. This chapter discusses report writing in general, with emphasis on
Human Factors issues, and provides the investigator with a method for reporting which expands upon guidance
contained in the ICAO Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation.
3.2
Prior to writing the report, the investigator should consider who will read it. Accident/incident
reports attract a varied readership, and each reader looks at the report from a different perspective. Industry
readers will read the report to ensure that it is technically correct; those who were directly involved in the occurrence will be concerned with their own accountability; the travelling public will want to be assured that problems
have been identified and are being dealt with; the media will want to extract the more sensational elements;
and litigants will be looking for who is liable. In writing the report, the investigator should be sensitive to the
different motivations, striving for technical accuracy, but ensuring that the language used can be understood
by the layperson and that statements of blame or liability are avoided.
3.3
Most importantly, the investigator must keep in mind the fundamental purpose of the investigation: the prevention of accidents and incidents. So, in addition to reporting the causes of an occurrence, the
report should serve as a means to identify the hazards uncovered during the course of the investigation and
whether they were handled effectively or ineffectively by the operator and regulator. Also, the report must offer
recommendations that aim at either eliminating or controlling those hazards. The report also serves as a tool
to educate the aviation community — to be effective, it should be written so that the reader, be it pilot,
mechanic, manager or regulator, can recognize and relate to the hazards reported and adopt appropriate
preventive strategies.
3.4
The investigator should also understand that the most important reader is the person
responsible for the implementation of the report’s safety recommendations. If that person is not convinced by
the report, preventive actions will not likely be taken.
3.5
Richard Wood, in discussing aircraft accident report writing at an International Society of Air
Safety Investigators (ISASI) conference in Munich in 1989, stated that “everyone who participated in the investigation understands the accident — or they think they do — but the written report is going to be the basis for
prevention, not the investigator’s recollections. If the report is not adequate, it really doesn’t make any
difference how good the investigation was.”1 He further points out that a poor report can undermine a good
investigation because the decision-makers are not going to react to a report that is flawed or poorly
substantiated. When writing an accident report, investigators should consider the following statement taken
from the ICAO Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation:


Once the Whats and Whys of the occurrence have been determined, it is relatively easy to
prepare the report. Report writing is not a blind voyage of discovery wherein one writes down everything one
knows about the occurrence in the hope that, by the time the end of the report is reached, the facts will speak
for themselves and the conclusions will logically flow from the text. To write a good report, the investigator must
acquaint the readers with the facts, conditions, and circumstances of the occurrence in an orderly fashion, and
analyse the information so that the conclusions and recommendations can be understood. To do this
successfully, the investigator, like any technical writer, will have to prepare a detailed outline before starting
to write, and will probably want to work through several drafts to achieve a good result.

In Section 1 — Factual Information, the investigator describes What happened and includes
information pertinent to the understanding of the circumstances surrounding the occurrence. There are 18
subsections that give the writer sufficient flexibility to structure the flow of pertinent information. The
subsections should be thought of as an organizational tool that allows the information gathered during an
investigation to be arranged in a logical manner and to be included in various sections. To be included in
Section 1, the information should a) provide an understanding of how the occurrence happened; b) present
in general terms the role of operational personnel involved and their qualifications; and c) provide the facts and
background of hazards identified, both related and unrelated to the causes of the occurrence.
3.9
Human Factors information and issues should appear in most of the subsections of Section
1, set down in the standard format as appropriate. Thus:

the sequence of events and actions of the crew, front-line operators, ATC personnel, ground
crew, etc, as far as can be constructed, are described in sub-section 1.1 — History of the
Flight. experience, training, qualifications, duty and rest periods of the crew are included in Personnel Information. Information about operational personnel who had
significant roles in the occurrence, be they maintenance staff, supervisory staff, management,
or regulatory personnel, should also be included in this sub-section with appropriate sub-titles.

aircraft design, certification, airworthiness, maintenance and mass and balance issues that
may have had an impact on the operation of the aircraft are described in sub-section 1.6 —
Aircraft Information.

communications, navaids, weather, pathological issues, etc. — all elements that may have an
impact on the crew’s ability to operate safely — are covered under specific sub-sections.



Additional Information — provides a place to include information that
cannot be readily included in any of the previous sub-sections. It is suggested that the
investigator structure this section so that a sub-section 1.17.1 can present factual information
in a format similar to the SHEL model. All the interfaces with the central Liveware component
can be discussed in this sub-section. For instance, using the Anytown example, the
investigator could expand on the liveware-liveware interface problems which surfaced in the
interactions between the captain and first officer, under an appropriate heading such as “Crew
Co-ordination”. This is also the appropriate sub-section for a discussion of a liveware hardware limitation such as the suitability of the aircraft type for the operation and the
attendant demands placed on a flight crew. Problems with written information (for example,
the lack of standard operating procedures) can be addressed in the context of a liveware software limitation. The investigator can also deal with liveware-environment limitations, such
as management’s decisions with respect to crew selection, pairing, standardisation and
training, scheduling, etc. Regulatory issues can be addressed, such as the lack of an adequate
monitoring process within the regulatory agency for certifying new routes. If the investigator
uses the SHEL model as a tool to aid in the gathering of information during the investigation
phase, the writing of this section becomes an extension of that process.
As discussed in Chapter 2 of this digest, the investigator needs to present the empirical
evidence to support the analysis of those Human Factors deemed influential in the occurrence.
A sub-section 1.17.2 can provide the appropriate place for additional information of this nature.
 the investigator would discuss the empirical
evidence pertinent to visual illusions.
3.10
In all parts of Section 1, only facts and factual discrepancies and hazards should be identified.
One way to show the presence of a discrepancy is to compare the known events to a recognized aviation
standard; for example, a discrepancy in the Anytown occurrence was the fact that the pilot, on landing, did not
conform to the recommended technique to avoid hydroplaning. The hazard identified with this discrepancy was
the airline company’s lack of instruction or requirement to practise the proper techniques to avoid hydroplaning
during simulator or flight training. Bearing in mind that many readers of the report may be unfamiliar with
aviation standards and practices, it is often necessary to describe the nature of the deviation in some detail.
3.11
In summary, throughout Section 1 of the report the deviations, discrepancies and hazards are
compared to a recognized standard or with empirical evidence, thus paving the way for the analysis of their
influence in bringing about the accident.
3.12
In Section 2 — Analysis, the investigator can concentrate on developing the reasons why the
circumstances resulted in the accident, creating the bridge between factual information and conclusions. This
portion of the analysis will report the results of the Test for Existence steps for the less tangible Human Factors
issues (see 2.53). Gaps in factual information must be filled in by extrapolation from the available information,
by making assumptions or by the use of logic. Assumptions used in the course of the investigation must be
identified in order to explain clearly the reasoning process. It is equally important to clarify what is not known
and could not be determined, as well as to discuss and resolve controversial and contradictory evidence.
3.13
Having established all of the important factual issues making up the occurrence, the
investigator must then develop the causal links. All reasonable hypotheses should be stated and evaluated to
demonstrate that alternative explanations of the events have been carefully considered. For the less tangible
Human Factors issues, the results of the Test for Influence steps will be reported (see 2.54). Richard Wood
suggests that each sub-section of the analysis should read “like a mini-accident report” wherein the facts
relating to a particular issue are stated, an analysis summarizing the investigator’s opinions based on the


preceding facts is provided, and conclusions about the relevance to the accident are drawn. Each portion of
the analysis should “stand alone as the definitive analysis of that subject.”2
3.14
One way to present the analysis is to follow the order of the information presented in Appendix 1, Part 1. The investigator is free to choose any logical sequence to present the argument in the most
effective way, however, and the sequence will often depend on the particular circumstances of the accident
or incident.
3.15
Another effective way to present the analysis is through the use of Reason’s model as outlined
in Chapter 1 of this Digest. Reason’s model — like the SHEL model — is a tool, and the two go hand in hand.
SHEL is a gathering tool in both the investigation and the presentation of factual information in the report,
Reason’s model is an analytical framework on which the factual information can be analysed. This model
fosters a systematic approach to investigation and encourages the investigator to include a description of the
conditions at the time of the occurrence, line management involvement, and the fallible decisions of upper
management and the regulator, followed by an analysis of each of these elements in the accident sequence.
The model allows the investigator to identify the hazards that combined to create the occurrence and points
the way for redress of these hazards. For example, the investigator can begin by giving a description of the
defences that were or were not in place and show how the errors committed went unchecked by the defences.
3.16
The use of Reason’s model can be demonstrated by the Anytown example. The writer can
begin by discussing the unsafe acts committed by the captain and why the defences were unable to prevent
the events from taking place:

the captain did not follow the recommended technique to avoid hydroplaning — had he
consulted the performance charts, he would have realized that the runway was not long
enough for the prevailing conditions

the failure by airport personnel to inspect the runway for standing water eliminated one of the
defences

when the regulators certified the airport despite inadequate firefighting equipment, they did not
provide a needed defence

the captain’s decision to fly the flight was made without all the available information

These active failures are symptoms of latent failures, i.e. the decisions of upper management and the
implementation of those decisions by line management. The captain’s performance is a reflection of defective
policies of both the airline and the aviation administration managements — policies that included an inadequate
training system, tight schedules that if delayed would collapse, the assignment of an unsuitable aircraft to the
operation, and the certification of Anytown airport despite its known operational and safety deficiencies. By
using Reason’s model as a framework, the investigator is able to start with the unsafe acts and show how they
developed from decisions far removed in both time and space.
3.17
Once the causation chain has been formulated and causal hazards identified, the writer can
turn to other hazards that were non-contributory but which nevertheless warrant safety action.
3.18
Section 3 — Conclusions, should flow logically from the analysis. The conclusions stated
should be consistent with the analysis and all hazards should be identified appropriately. Important findings

may be paraphrases or duplications of the conclusions drawn in the analysis. Investigators must be careful to
use the same degrees of certainty in their conclusions as they have established in their analyses.
Anytown: The conclusion reached in the analysis on the role of the illusion could be repeated verbatim:
“It is probable that the visual illusion contributed to the pilot’s misjudgement of the landing.” It would
be inconsistent and intellectually dishonest to remove the word “probable” and state this particular
conclusion as a certainty.
3.19
Sometimes the circumstances of the accident are such that no firm conclusion can be drawn
about causes. Some of the more likely hypotheses should be discussed, but the investigator should have no
hesitation to state that the causes remain undetermined.
3.20
The ICAO Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation states that “The expression of causes
should be a concise statement of the reasons why the accident occurred and not an abbreviated description
of the circumstances of the accident.” It remains a problem that many cause statements in accident reports are
not really causes on which safety recommendations can be made, but rather merely brief descriptions of the
accident. The expression of causes may also have other shortcomings — for example, sometimes only one
or a small number of causal factors receives emphasis to the detriment of other factors which could be equally
important in terms of accident prevention. Also, there is a tendency to highlight the active failures of the
persons closest to the event rather than to establish a complete explanation of why the accident occurred.
3.21

The expression of causes should be based on the following principles:

all causes should be listed, usually in chronological order
causes should be formulated with corrective and preventive measures in mind;

they should be linked and related to appropriate safety recommendations; and
causes should not apportion blame or liability.

3.22
A few States have used a format that eliminated the problems associated with the expression
of cause statements by simply not making such statements. Instead, their conclusions section comprises a
listing of all findings considered factors in the occurrence under the heading “cause-related findings”. This is
followed by a listing, under the heading “other findings”, of all those hazards which did not contribute to the
occurrence but which nonetheless need to be addressed.
3.23
The use of probability language may be called for when stating findings relating to human
performance. When the weight of the evidence is such that a definitive statement cannot be made,
investigators should state findings as positively as possible, using the appropriate degree of confidence and
probability in their language.

ACCIDENT PREVENTION
3.24
According to the ICAO Accident Prevention Manual, accident prevention must aim at all
hazards in the system, regardless of their origin. If we are to prevent accidents, follow-up action must be taken
in response to the hazards identified in the course of accident and incident investigations. ICAO Annex 13 places
considerable emphasis on such accident prevention measures. Recommendation 7.1 states that:

34

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144
At any stage of the investigation of an accident or incident, wherever it occurred, the accident
investigation authority of the State conducting the investigation should recommend to the
appropriate authorities, including those in other States, any preventive action which needs to
be taken promptly to prevent similar occurrences.

3.25
Regarding Section 4 of the final report — Safety Recommendations, the ICAO Manual of
Aircraft Accident Investigation states:
Include here any safety recommendation made for the purpose of accident prevention and state, if
appropriate, any resultant corrective action. Irrespective of whether recommendations are included as
an integral part of the report or presented separately (dependent upon State procedures), it should be
borne in mind that the ultimate goal of a truly effective investigation is to improve air safety. To this end
the recommendations should be made in general or specific terms in regard to matters arising from
the investigation whether they be directly associated with causal factors or have been prompted by
other factors in the investigation.
3.26
While the emphasis is on formulating recommendations, the more difficult task is clearly
identifying the hazards warranting follow-up safety action. The focus of the investigator at this point must be
on problem definition, as only after the problem has been clearly identified and validated can reasonable
consideration be given to corrective action.
3.27
The Reason model, as illustrated in Figure 3-1, provides guidance in the formulation of
preventive measures just as it provides guidance for accident investigation. Since many of the psychological
precursors and unsafe acts are results of decisions made further up the line, it makes sense to concentrate
preventive measures on hazards created or ignored by the higher levels of management. If the report focuses
on the specific error of an individual while failing to consider higher-level decisions, it will do nothing to address
the underlying responsibilities for identifying, eliminating or mitigating the effects of hazards.

Failure types

LINE
MANAGEMENT
DEFICIENCIES


Failure tokens

PSYCHOLOGICAL
PRECURSORS
OF UNSAFE
ACTS

UNSAFE
ACTS

ACCIDENTS
AND
INCIDENTS
Local checks
on adequacy
of existing
defences





How effective companies, manufacturers or regulators are at identifying, eliminating or
mitigating hazards is dependent upon the response strategy they adopt. There is a choice of three:
deny that there is a problem;
repair the observed problem to prevent its recurrence; or
reform or optimise the system as a whole.

Each strategy has its own typical set of actions. A denial strategy may involve dismissing the pilot or producing
a pilot-error statement; it deals only with the unsafe act and looks no further for explanation. A repair strategy
recognises the immediate problem and attempts to rectify it through actions such as retraining the person who
committed the unsafe act or modifying dangerous items of equipment. A reform strategy admits that there are
problems beyond the unsafe act level and systematic action is taken, leading to reappraisal and eventual
reform of the system as a whole.
3.29
When companies, regulators, and accident investigators adopt a reform strategy, they turn their
attention to loops 3 and 4 in Figure 3-1. Deficiencies at these higher levels — including those which had
nothing to do with the accident in question — deserve greatest attention in the investigation and report-writing
phase. Because the causal connection is frequently tenuous, it is often a challenge to establish that a
hazardous situation was created at this level. It should also be noted decision-makers do not always receive
the feedback that they need to make sound decisions — such feedback is sometimes filtered by line
management, resulting in unintended consequences for the organisation and its personnel.
3.30
The problem of identifying a causal connection between a hazard and high-level management
can be overcome through a systematic investigation, the appropriate research of other similar operations and
examination of safety data bases. For example, using the Anytown airport scenario, it may be determined that
co-ordination between pilot and co-pilot was poor, partly because both pilots were inexperienced on aircraft
type and with the operation. Disciplining or dismissing them would do nothing to eliminate the problems of crew
pairing, not only in the company but in the aviation system at large. But to establish the existence of this
hazard, the investigator would probably have to allude to several other accidents where a link had been
established between crew co-ordination problems and higher-level corporate decisions with respect to crew
pairing. Having established a common hazard for this type of operation would then lead directly to a variety of
preventive strategies for dealing with such operational hazards, strategies which could be implemented and
monitored.
3.31
The amount of time required to validate a safety hazard varies. When dealing with clear-cut
factual findings such as errors in publications, material deficiencies through design errors, etc., the validation
phase may be relatively short. However, for potential safety hazards involving areas of Human Factors (e.g.
the effects of fatigue on crew performance, the consequences of a company’s putting pressures on pilot
decision-making, etc.) validation can be time-consuming, as factual evidence is often more difficult to acquire,
and the effects of their interrelationships more difficult to assess. The difficulty was illustrated by the NTSB
investigation into the Fairchild Metro III accident at Bayfield, Colorado in 1988. Toxicology tests revealed traces
of cocaine and cocaine metabolite in the pilot. A major human performance issue was to examine the possible
effect cocaine usage had on the accident sequence. The scientific data on the behavioural effects of cocaine
exposure were limited, and assessment of the effects on performance was complicated when inadequate rest
and a long duty day were added to the equation. Individual differences also had to be acknowledged in
determining the effects of the interrelationship of these factors. This issue is still unresolved.
3.32
For many human performance phenomena, the evidence from a single occurrence may be
insufficient to validate a safety hazard. Hence, the investigator must evaluate the data available from similar



occurrences (perhaps on a worldwide basis) to demonstrate the probable impact of a particular phenomenon
on human performance in the investigation in question. A comprehensive review of the professional literature
may be warranted. In extreme cases additional formal study by specialists may be justified in order to validate
the existence of a hazard.
3.33
With a clear understanding of the problem, the investigator can formulate and assess various
alternative courses of action to remedy the problem. The draft recommendation should be considered for its
technical feasibility, acceptability by the aviation community, practicality and ease of implementation. In
assessing alternative courses of action, consideration must also be given to the most appropriate recipient for
the recommendation.
3.34
Safety recommendations should not be considered as authoritative edicts by the investigating
body. Since the investigator cannot be omniscient, blind obedience by the regulator in implementing
recommendations could bring great harm to the industry. For example, the investigator is seldom in a good
position to assess the economic feasibility of implementing a particular safety measure, and the agency
receiving a safety recommendation should be given considerable latitude in choosing the most appropriate
course of action. The investigating agency should be satisfied if the identified safety deficiency is adequately
addressed, whether or not recommendations were specifically followed. Hence, the actual wording of
recommendations should be quite general, in order to give the action agency sufficient room to manoeuvre.
“A well thought-out recommendation should achieve two goals:

It should clearly focus attention on the problem, not on the suggested solution to it.
This should eliminate the possibility that the problem will be rejected along with the
recommendation; and


The recommendation should be flexible enough to permit the action agency some
latitude in precisely how that objective can be achieved. This is particularly important
if all the salient facts are not yet available and some additional examination and
testing appears necessary.

In other words, the recommendation should focus on what needs to be changed, rather than
how to do it.”
Richard Wood has also noted that safety recommendations can generally be classified into one of three levels:


a level one safety action completely removes the offending safety hazard;



a level two safety action modifies the system so as to reduce the risk of the underlying hazard;
and



a level three safety action accepts that the hazard can be neither eliminated nor reduced
(controlled), and therefore aims at teaching people how to cope with it.

The aim should always be to eliminate safety hazards; unfortunately, when dealing with hazards deriving from
Human Factors, the tendency has been to prescribe level three coping strategies.
3.35
Since safety hazards with respect to many Human Factors may be extremely difficult to
validate, it may be wise to recommend further study of the perceived hazard by more competent authorities.

In this way, the investigator can proceed with the confidence that the investigation report is not the final word
on particularly difficult safety issues. Industry’s recognition of the importance of crew resource management
(CRM) illustrates this point. In a number of one State’s accident investigation reports, the hazards resulting from
the lack of effective flight deck management were identified and recommendations made. The problem was
thus validated through the investigation and analysis of many accidents, and this validation led to some of the
larger airlines not only recognising there were potential problems in the cockpit, but also designing and
implementing CRM courses to improve cockpit co-ordination. Other airlines, realizing the value of CRM training,
then began to instruct their flight crews, using the courses developed by the larger companies, and CRM
training is now widely accepted and available.

CONSULTATION WITH STATES
3.36
The consultative process is one in which the final report is circulated in draft form to the States
involved in the investigation, giving them an opportunity to comment on it and thus ensuring its completeness
and accuracy and pre-empting criticism after public release. This process should not be seen as an opportunity
to cloud the issues, nor as a forum for litigation, but rather as a process whereby the States involved can take
positive steps toward ensuring that the report adequately reflects the accident sequence, identifies the safety
hazards present and recommends appropriate remedial action for the promotion of accident prevention. This
is a valuable process which also could be practised within a State when dealing with interested parties in a
domestic occurrence.


As previously mentioned, seldom do the events of a single accident or incident convincingly
demonstrate the presence of a fundamental safety hazard with respect to Human Factors. Usually, such
hazards are only validated through the analysis of similar occurrences. For such a validation process to be
effective, all relevant information from previous similar occurrences would have to be adequately recorded for
future reference. Indeed, one of the many reasons why progress has been slow in initiating appropriate
preventive actions for many Human Factors issues is inadequate reporting of this type of information.
Whether or not the Human Factors data gathered in an investigation are clearly linked to the
causes of the specific occurrence, they should be recorded in a Human Factors data base to facilitate future
analysis. For ICAO Contracting States, the principal data base for recording such information is ADREP, a
system which records a series of factors describing what happened as well as a series of factors explaining
why it happened.
3.40
Since human error or shortcomings in performance are usually factors in accidents, ADREP
provides a sound framework for recording Human Factors data. Unfortunately, to date ADREP has not been
consistently used to record pertinent data from incidents or even from some State’s accidents.
3.41
There are other data bases available to support the investigation of Human Factors. For
example, the Aviation Safety Reporting System in the United States has compiled the data from over 100 000
voluntary reports of hazards by pilots and air traffic controllers; most of these have a human performance

element. Other States with voluntary reporting systems are similarly developing specialized data bases which
have a high Human Factors content. Universities and research organizations also compile highly specialized
data bases for analysing particular Human Factors phenomena within the context of their research efforts.
While such data bases may provide a useful adjunct to the investigator in analysing a particular occurrence,
they are not suitable repositories for the data arising out of the investigation — only ADREP satisfactorily
provides a comprehensive world-wide means of recording accident/incident data to facilitate a better
understanding of the explanatory factors.
3.42
On a world-wide basis, there is a continuing requirement to provide better means of recording
Human Factors data in a user-friendly format if we are to learn from the lessons of others. Given the frequency
of Human Factors elements in accidents and incidents, it is imperative that we facilitate future safety analysis
through better data reporting.

Although each checklist reflects a different approach to the investigation of Human Factors, all three have the
goal of assisting the investigator to identify the relevant factors and focus analysis on germane issues. Any
one, or even all three, may be adapted for use by the investigator.


To determine the relevant areas warranting further Human
Factors investigation/analysis, rate the importance of each factor
by indicating the appropriate weighting value beside each item.

Personality, moods, character

Memory mindset (expectancy)

Habit patterns

Perceptions or illusions

Bush pilot syndrome

BEHAVIOURAL FACTORS
MEDICAL FACTORS
Faulty planning (pre-flight, in-flight)

Haste (hurried departure, etc.)

Pressing the weather


boredom, inattention, distraction


Personal problems (familial,
professional, financial)

Overconfidence, excessive
motivation (“get-home”itis)


Lack of confidence



Physical attributes, conditioning
and general health

Sensory acuity (vision, hearing,
smell
Fatigue


Sleep deprivation


Circadian disrhythmia (jet lag)


Nutritional factors (missed meals,
food poisoning

Apprehension/panic


Medication(s) (self-prescribed)

Violation of flight discipline
(risk-taking)


Medication(s) (doctor-prescribed)

Error in judgement


Drug/alcohol ingestion


Delay

Altered consciousness
Complacency, lack of
motivation

Reaction time or temporal distortions

Hypoxia, hyperventilation

Interpersonal tension


Disbarisms, trapped gases

Inadequate stress coping

Decompression
Drug abuse

Motion sickness
Alcohol/hangover

Disorientation, vertigo
Visual illusions


Stress


Hypothermia/hyperthermia


Other acute illness(es)


Pre-existing disease
OPERATIONAL FACTORS

EQUIPMENT DESIGN FACTORS

Design/location of instruments,
controls

Lighting

Workspace incompatibility

Anthropometric incompatibility

Confusion of controls, switches, etc.
Personnel selection
Misread instruments
Limited experience
Visual restrictions due to structure

Inadequate transition training
Task oversaturation (complex steps)

Lack of currency/proficiency Inadvertent operation


Inadequate knowledge of
A/C systems


Cockpit standardization (lack of)


Personal equipment interference


Inadequate knowledge of
A/C life support systems


In-flight life support equipment

Company policies and procedures
Effects of automation

Supervision
Seat design/configuration

Command and control relationships


Aerodrome design and layout

Company operating pressures

Conspicuity of other aircraft,
vehicles etc.


Crew compatibility


Crew training (e.g. cockpit
resource management)


Inadequate flight information
(A/C manuals, flight planning, etc.)

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

Weather


Air turbulence


Illusions (white-out, black hole, etc.)


Visibility restriction (glare, etc.)

TASK-RELATED FACTORS

Tasking information (briefing, etc.)


Work area lighting



Task components (number,
duration, etc.)


Noise


Workload tempo


Acceleration/deceleration forces



Workload saturation



Decompression



Supervisory surveillance of operation



Vibration



Judgement and decision-making


Heat/cold



Situational awareness



Windblast


Distractions


Motion (dutch roll, snaking, etc.)

Short-term memory

Smoke, fumes in cockpit


False hypotheses (vs. expectancy,
habit, etc.)


Oxygen contamination

Cockpit resource management

poisoning or other
toxic chemicals


Radiation


Electrical shock


Flicker vertigo

Air Traffic Control




Communications (phraseology, rate
of speech, pronunciation etc.)



Working environment (lighting,
noise, visibility, etc.)



Equipment/display layout and design



Judgement



Training and currency



Co-ordination and back-ups


Supervisory presence

ATC policies and operating
procedures

Adequacy of written materials
(availability, understandability,
currency)
Misinterpretation of oral
communications



Language barrier



Noise interference



Disrupted oral communication



Intra-crew co-ordination



Vehicle Operators

Selection and training


Working environment (noise, fatigue,
visibility, etc.)

Crew/ATS communication


Command and control, supervision



Timeliness/accuracy of verbal
communications

Aircraft Line-Servicing Personnel


Selection and training



Cockpit crew non-verbal
communications



Availability of relevant information



Cockpit warnings, horns, chimes, etc.



Operating pressures



Cockpit instrument displays1


Supervision


Airport signals, marking
and lighting


Ground/hand signals

SURVIVABILITY FACTORS


Crashworthiness of design

Post-accident life support equipment
(exits, chutes, life vests, ELTs,
medical kits, etc.)

OTHER PERSONNEL FACTORS
Air Traffic Control


Command and control procedures


Attention (vigilance,
forgetfulness, etc.)


Crew training


Fatigue vs workload


Passenger briefings and demos

B. CHECKLIST BASED ON THE SHEL MODEL
FACTORS RELATING TO THE
INDIVIDUAL (LIVEWARE)
PHYSICAL FACTORS
Physical characteristics
height, weight, age, sex
build, sitting height, functional
reach, leg length, shoulder width
strength, coordination

Sensory limitations
Vision 
visual threshold
* visual acuity (seeing details)
* focus time
* light adaptation
* peripheral vision
* speed, depth perception
* empty field myopia
* glasses, contacts

* auditory threshold, understanding
* vestibular (ear senses)
* smell, touch
* kinaesthetic (body feelings)
* g-tolerances

2. PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS
Nutritional factors
* food intake 24 hours
* hours since last meal
* dehydration
* on a diet/weight loss
Health
* disease
* fitness
* pain
* dental conditions
* blood donation
* obesity, pregnancy
* stress coping (emotional/
behavioural signs)
* smoker
Lifestyle
* friendships
* relations with others
* change in activities
* life habits
Fatigue
* acute (short term)
* chronic (long term)
* skill (due to task)
* activity level (mental/physical)
Duty
* duration of flight
* duty hours
* leave periods — activities
Sleep
* crew rest, nap duration
* sleep deficit, disruption
* circadian disrythmia (jet lag)
Drugs
* medication over the counter
* medication — prescription
* illicit drugs
* cigarettes, coffee, others
Alcohol
* impairment
* hangover
* addiction
Incapacitation
* carbon monoxide poisoning
* hypoxia/anoxia
* hyperventilation
* loss of consciousness
* motion sickness
* food poisoning
* nauseating fumes
* toxic fumes
* others

Decompression/diving
* decompression
* trapped gas effects
* underwater diving
Illusions
Vestibular
* somatogyral (vertigo)
* somatogravic
* the leans
* coriolis illusion
* elevator illusion
* giant hand
Visual
* black hole
* autokinesis
* horizontal misplacement
* circularvection
* linearvection
* landing illusions
* chain-link fence illusion
* flicker vertigo
* geometric perspective illusion
3. PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS
Perceptions
Types
* non perception
* misperception
* delayed perception
Reaction time
* to detect
* to make an appropriate decision
* to take the appropriate action
Disorientation
* situational awareness
* spatial
* visual
* temporal
* geographic (lost)
Attention
* attention span
* inattention (general, selective)
* distraction (internal, external)
* channelized attention
* fascination, fixation
* vigilance, boredom, monotony
* habit pattern interference
* habit pattern substitution
* time distortion
Information Processing
* mental capacity
* decision making (delayed, poor)
* judgment (delayed, poor)
* memory capacity
* forgetting
* co-ordination — timing
Workload
* task saturation
* underload
* prioritization
* task components

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144
Experience/recency
* in position
* in aircraft type, total time
* on instruments
* on route, aerodrome
* night time
* emergency procedures
Knowledge
* competence
* skills/techniques
* airmanship
* procedures
Training
* initial
* on the job
* ground
* flight
* transition, learning transfer
* recurrent
* problem areas
* emergency procedures
Planning
* pre-flight
* in flight
Attitudes/moods
* mood
* motivation
* habituation
* attitude
* boredom
* complacency
Expectations
* mind set/expectancy
* false hypothesis
* “get-home”itis
* risk-taking
Confidence
* in aircraft
* in equipment
* in self
* overconfidence, showing off
Mental/emotional State
* emotional state
* anxiety
* apprehension
* panic
* arousal level/reactions
* self-induced mental
pressure/stress
Personality
* withdrawn, grouchy, inflexible
* hostile, sarcastic, negative
* aggressive, assertive, impulsive
* excitable, careless, immature
* risk taker, insecure, follower
* disorganized, late, messy
* anti-authoritative,resigned
* invulnerable, "macho"

* significant lifestyle changes
* family pressure
FACTORS RELATED TO INDIVIDUALS
AND THEIR WORK
1. LIVEWARE-LIVEWARE
(HUMAN-HUMAN) INTERFACE
Oral communication
* noise interference
* misinterpretation
* phraseology (operational)
* content, rate of speech
* language barrier
* readback/hearback
Visual signals
* ground/hand signals
* body language
Crew interactions
* supervision
* briefings
* co-ordination
* compatibility/pairing
* resource management
* task assignment
* age, personality, experience
Controllers
* supervision
* briefing
* coordination
Passengers
* behaviour
* briefing
* knowledge of aircraft, procedures
WORKER-MANAGEMENT
Personnel
* recruitment/selection
* staffing requirements
* training
* policies
* remuneration/incentives
* crew pairing, scheduling
* seniority
* resource allocation
* operational support/control
* instructions/directions/orders
* managerial operating pressure
Supervision
* operational supervision
* quality control
* standards
Labour relations
* employee/employee-management
* industrial action
* unions/professional group

4. PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS
* mental pressure
* interpersonal conflict
* personal loss
* financial problems

Pressures
* mental pressure — operational
* morale
* peer pressure

43

44
Regulatory agency
* standards
* regulations
* implementation
* audit
* inspection
* monitoring
* surveillance
2. LIVEWARE-HARDWARE
(HUMAN-MACHINE) INTERFACE
Equipment
Switches, controls, displays
* instrument/controls design
* instrument/controls location
* instrument/controls movement
* colours, markings, illumination
* confusion, standardization
Workspace
* workspace layout
* workspace standardization
* communication equipment
* eye reference position
* seat design
* restrictions to movement
* illumination level
* motor workload
* information displays
* visibility restrictions
* alerting and warnings
* personal equipment interference
(comfort)
* data link
* operation of instruments
(finger trouble)
3. LIVEWARE-SOFTWARE
(HUMAN-SYSTEM) INTERFACE
Written information
* manuals
* checklists
* publications
* regulations
* maps and charts
* NOTAMs
* standard operating procedures
* signage
* directives
Computers
* computer software
* user friendliness
Automation
* operator workload
* monitoring task
* task saturation
* situational awareness
* skill maintenance
* utilization
Regulatory requirements
* qualification — in position
* qualification — in management

ICAO Circular 240-AN/144
* certification
* medical certificate
* licence/rating
* non-compliance
* infraction history
4. LIVEWARE-ENVIRONMENT
(HUMAN-ENVIRONMENT) INTERFACE
INTERNAL
* heat, cold, humidity
* ambient pressure
* illumination, glare
* acceleration
* noise interference
* vibrations
* air quality, pollution, fumes
* ozone, radiations
EXTERNAL
Weather
* weather briefing, FSS facilities
* weather: actual and forecasts
* weather visibility, ceiling
* turbulence (wind, mechanic)
* whiteout
Other factors
* time of day
* lighting/glare
* other air traffic
* wind blast
* terrain/water features obstacles
Infrastructure
Dispatch facilities
* type of facilities
* use
* quality of service
At the gate
* APU
* towing equipment
* refuelling equipment
* support equipment
Aerodrome
* runway/taxiway characteristics
* markings, lighting, obstructions
* approach aids
* emergency equipment
* radar facilities
* ATC facilities
* FSS, weather facilities
* airfield facilities
Maintenance
* support equipment
* availability of parts
* operational standards,
procedures and practices
* quality assurance practices
* servicing and inspection
* training
* documentation requirements


The purpose of this checklist on selection, training and
experience for human factors aspects of accident investigation
is to assist the investigator during the field phase in developing
a comprehensive factual base on the pilot selection, training and
experience issues relevant to the specific accident under
investigation.
An effort has been made to present the checklist in a generic
format so that investigators can apply it to any modality by
substituting “air traffic controller”, “mechanic”, etc., for “pilot”, as
appropriate. However, since most accidents are by nature
unique and diverse, some degree of discretion will be required
to tailor the checklist to particular cases. In this way, the
checklist is a dynamic tool, to be modified and updated with use
over time.

How long has the pilot worked for this specific employer?
How long did the pilot work for his previous employers?
Was the pilot's previous experience verified by his/her
current employer? Has the pilot ever been involved in any other accidents in this
modality? If yes,
 Describe the circumstances. When? What equipment was in use?
 Has the pilot ever been involved in any other accidents in
other modalities? If yes,

 SELECTION
 When was the pilot selected for this position?
 How was the pilot selected?
 What were the required qualifications? (e.g. experience,
education, training
requirements)

 What is the total length of time the pilot has worked in this
modality?

and

physiological/medical

 Were any examinations required? What? When taken?
 What special licences were required?
 Were the pilot's qualifications, references and licenses
verified by his/her employer prior to selection for
employment? Was specific training on this position provided to the pilot
before he was selected for it? If yes,

 Describe the circumstances.
 When?
 What equipment was in use?
Has the pilot ever complained about or reported any
problems related to the use of this specific equipment? If
yes, Describe the nature of the complaints or report.
 When?
 Were any corrective action made? By whom? When?
 Have any other similar complaints or reports ever been
made? Provide details.

Describe the content of the training.

PILOT TRAINING

When was this training?

The investigator should review (requesting copies when
applicable) training-related records, documents, rule books,
manuals, bulletins and pilot examinations.

Who provided this training? Was specific training on this position provided to the pilot
after he was selected for it? If yes,
Describe its content.

 What training has the pilot received on the use of equipment
in this modality?
When was this training given?

Describe the training: classroom? simulator? on-the-jobtraining (OJT)? materials used? topics?

Who provided this training?
 When did the pilot receive it?

 Where any problems ever noted with the pilot's performance
after he assumed the duties of this position? If yes,
 describe the problems.
 When were these observations made? Who made these observations?
 What actions, if any, were taken to correct the problems?
 PILOT EXPERIENCE
What other experience has the pilot had using this specific
equipment? What other jobs has the pilot had using other equipment in
this modality?
Who were the instructors and/or supervisors? How was the pilot's performance evaluated (e.g. check
ride, on the road, simulation, paper and pencil
examination)?
 What was the over-all evaluation of the pilot's
performance?
 Were any problems noted in the pilot's performance? If
yes,
— What were they?
— How were they noted and by whom?
— What corrective actions were taken, if any? Initial training vs. follow-on training using this specific
equipment:
 Has the pilot received training on this equipment from
more than one employer? If yes,
— Which employer provided the initial training?
— When?
— How much emphasis was placed on:
— compliance with Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs)
— compliance with rules and requirements?
— use of performance evaluations (e.g. check rides,
examinations)?
b) How does the pilot's initial training differ from any followon or subsequent training in terms of the following:
— Compliance with SOPs?
— Compliance with rules and regulations?
— Use of performance evaluations (e.g. check rides,
examinations)?
c) Do any of these differences appear related to the
mishaps?
— Did the pilot violate any SOPs he had been taught? If
yes,
— What were they?
— When were they taught?
— Did the pilot violate any rules or requirements he had
been taught? If yes,
— What were they?
— When were they taught?
— Has the pilot ever violated any rules, requirements, or
SOPs before? If yes,
— What were the circumstances?
— What actions were taken?
— Has the pilot received any new, recent training that
may have:
— Interfered with his knowledge and skills in using
this equipment?
— Required his use of new, different SOPs under
emergency conditions?

Other training issues: Has the pilot received any recent training for:
— Transition to operation of different equipment in this
modality?
— Learning different operations of similar equipment
systems?

b) If the pilot has received any recent transition and/or
differences training:
— Describe when and type.
— Check potential interference from this training with
operation of accident equipment.
c) Is the pilot current in all areas of accident equipment
operation?
— Describe areas lacking currency.
— Describe required exams, certificates or licenses
indicating full currency.
d) Rate sufficiency of training on:
— Emergency situations.
— Equipment malfunctions.
— Maintenance reports, complaint procedures, logs.
— Crew interaction and coordination skills.
— Degraded conditions (e.g. reduced visibility, high sea
state, gusty or high winds, heavy precipitation).
— Communication procedures.
— Physiological requirements (e.g. issues related to
rest, health, nutrition and use of medication, drugs
and alcohol).
e) If simulators or training device were used for training:
— What specific training was provided in the simulator or
training device?
— What are the major similarities and/or differences
between the simulator or training device and the
actual equipment?
— How recent was the training with the simulator or
training device?
— Were any problem areas noted in the pilot's
performance?
f) Did the pilot receive training specifically related to the
conditions of the mishap (e.g. wind-shear, equipment,
malfunction, specific type of emergency, specific weather
conditions)? If yes,
— Describe when and type.
— How did the pilot perform in training?
g) Was the pilot providing or receiving training at the time of
the mishap? If yes,
— Describe the circumstances in detail.
— Determine the qualifications of instructor(s) and/or
trainee(s) involved.
— When did this training begin and how long had it been
in progress?


Interviews conducted with individuals either directly or indirectly involved in an occurrence are an important
source of evidence. Information gleaned from such interviews can be used to confirm, clarify, or supplement
information learned from other sources. Certainly, in the absence of measurable data, interviews become the
single source of information, and investigators need to be well acquainted with the techniques required to
ensure effective interviews.
Information gained in interviews will help to determine what happened. More importantly, interviews are
often the only way to answer the important “why” questions which, in turn, can facilitate correct and effective
safety action.
In most investigations, Human Factors will have to be assessed, and the investigator who dons the Human
Factors hat will be faced with interviewing a variety of people. Included within this group are survivors (both
crew and passengers), next of kin, friends, colleagues and company management/training personnel.
In preparation for interviews, investigators must remember that every witness deals with the occurrence
from a different perspective. Consider the cabin crew members who survived a crash and may be suffering guilt
at the fact that they survived while others died; they may be struggling with their role in the crash sequence,
tormenting themselves with “What if” questions. The situation might involve flight crew members experiencing
a myriad of emotions: grief where deaths are involved; pressure from company management or union representative; stress over whether their livelihood is at stake; anxiety over regulatory action; confusion about what
happened, etc. Company management concerns may focus on regulatory action and litigation, and responses
may be tailored accordingly.
Next of kin interviews are always difficult — imagine the emotional roller coaster experienced by the next
of kin: grief and anger at the loss of a loved one; perhaps guilt; anxiety over financial concerns; confusion
caused by media accounts, etc. Further consideration will have to be given to the witness who is under
medication for shock or physical pain as a result of injury; such a situation will have some bearing on how
extensive the interview will be and on its validity.
The investigator has to be a chameleon, capable of adapting to various scenarios. An effective interviewer
remains objective and avoids making evaluations early in the interview. Even when faced with conflicting
evidence, the investigator should listen to what a witness has to relate and should suspend judgement of that
information until all facts have been gathered and an assessment can be made: the pilot who has been fired
may be a disgruntled employee with a desire to sully the company’s reputation or he may be a credible witness
with very real truths to relate.
The investigator must give special consideration to grieving next of kin, projecting the right amount of
empathy without becoming sympathetic. The interview is a dynamic situation, and, to take advantage, the
investigator has to be adaptable, knowing when to focus and when to back off. Before conducting an interview,
the investigator should try to obtain as much information about factors such as the crash sequence (walking
the site may be helpful), applicable procedures that were in effect (allows comparison to what was done in


actuality), the crew (scanning pilot records will tell, for example, whether the pilot was required to wear glasses,
and, during subsequent interviews, the investigator can attempt to establish if the pilot wore glasses during the
flight), etc. By knowing as much as possible before the interview, the investigator has room to manoeuvre and
is saved having to re-interview.

Success of the interview
Good interviews are the result of effective planning. There are a number of preparatory issues that need to be
considered before an interview is conducted:

Timing of interviews
Interviews should be conducted as soon as possible after the occurrence to prevent loss of perishable information as a result of fading memory or rationalisation. Passage of time also permits contamination of information,
which occurs when witnesses confer with one another or listen to or read media accounts. If it is necessary to
delay interviews, statements should be requested. These serve the dual purpose of capturing facts before
natural decay, in addition to assisting the investigator in the preparation of the subsequent interview.

Location
Witnesses should be made to feel at ease, and to this end the investigator should choose a location that is
quiet, reasonably comfortable, and free from interruption. If a witness wishes to smoke, the investigator should
accommodate this wish. Next of kin will probably prefer to be interviewed in their own home.

Approach
Because Human Factors permeate all aspects of an accident, it is often advantageous for the investigator to
conduct interviews in conjunction with investigators from other groups. This approach recognizes the requirement for cross-fertilization within an investigation and, in doing so, becomes an effective tool in gathering
information. The team approach may eliminate the need to re-interview a witness and is thus a more efficient
use of resources. Further, as team members, the investigators are able to later corroborate the information
given. In deciding whether to use the team approach, the witness’s personality and the sensitivity of information
sought must be considered. In some circumstances, a private one-on-one interview will illicit much more
information.
During interviews, investigators should minimize their input and instead concentrate on active listening —
an investigator who is talking isn’t listening. Certainly, the investigator must direct the interview and keep it
moving, but, generally, the less active the interviewer, the more productive the result. By listening to what is
being said, the investigator will be able to reformulate questions appropriate to the situation, note discrepancies
and sudden changes in conversation, perceive innuendoes and observe a witness’s gestures and behaviour.
Silence can be an effective tool during the interviewing process, and the investigator should avoid trying
to fill in pauses in conversation too quickly. More often than not, people want to talk about the occurrence,
about the friend, husband or wife they lost, about the wrongs they believe should be righted, etc., and they will
often fill in the pauses themselves.

Co-operation
Co-operation, which is essential to the success of the interview, is often determined by the impression the
investigator makes on the person being interviewed. A friendly approach that treats the witness as an equal
and is as unobtrusive as possible is preferable to one that is effusive or bureaucratic. Simple things, such as
assessing the audience and dressing accordingly, may make a difference in how forthcoming a witness is with
information. Casual clothes instead of a suit may be more appropriate and less threatening in some environments. By developing a relationship of mutual confidence with a witness, the investigator is more assured of
a free flow of information, ideas and opinions. According to the ICAO Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation,
“a philosophy of interview rather than interrogation is desirable in the questioning of witnesses by the
investigator.”

Control
It is imperative that the investigator control the interview. Under certain circumstances, a witness may wish to
be accompanied by another person for support — a parent may wish to be present during the interview of a
child, survivors may wish to have their spouse present, a crew member may want a lawyer or union
representative in attendance — and this request should be accommodated. Control becomes a difficult task
when third parties are present, but an early understanding of the ground rules as specified by the investigator
should minimize disruptions. Before an interview begins, it should be clear to and agreed upon by all parties
that the attendance of a third party, other than an expert assisting the investigator, will only be considered at
the request of the witness; that the investigator is the only person to direct questions to the witness; that
questions provided in writing by other parties in attendance may be given to the investigator and, if accepted,
will be used at an appropriate time; and that the investigator maintains the right to prohibit certain individuals
from attending when their attendance could inhibit an effective interview.

Tape recorder
A tape recorder is a valuable tool. It allows the investigator to focus full attention on what the witness has to
say; it provides a complete and accurate record of what was said; and it allows the statement to be played
back. The investigator should be prepared for witnesses who are reluctant to have their statements recorded.
In such cases, it will be necessary to explain that the tape recorder is there to allow the interview to be
conducted more quickly and to ensure accuracy; the fact that the tape recorder provides a good record and
eliminates the need to possibly re-interview a witness may be used as an argument in defence of its use.
Reluctance disappears quickly if the recorder is used unobtrusively. Where there is reason to believe that the
reluctance will not dissipate, the investigator will have to use a different method, such as note-taking; those who
subscribe to the team approach will be able to use this method best — one member asks questions and
another takes notes.

Structure
Effective interviews are characterized by a logical structure designed to maximize the quality and quantity of
relevant information. The interview comprises four basic parts — the plan, the opening, the main body, and
the closing — each with a specific purpose. In cases where there are a large number of survivors, a list of
questions to be asked of every survivor should be prepared so that a comparison for reliability can be made
at a later date.

Prior to interviewing a witness, the investigator needs to define the general objectives of the interview, be
aware of what some of the obstacles to achieving those objectives might be, and understand the expectations
of the witness. The investigator should have some knowledge of the person being interviewed and should
determine questions to be asked based on that knowledge. The sequencing of questions and the placement
of the tougher questions can be considered at this step. Many witnesses, such as next-of-kin, have a legitimate
requirement for information about the occurrence. The investigator should preplan the information which will
be released to the witness at the appropriate moment in the interview.
Preparing a list of questions that has to be rigorously followed is not the purpose of the planning step;
rather it is the time to ensure that all areas of concern will be addressed during the interview.

Most witnesses are probably being interviewed by an investigator for the first time. They will be apprehensive
and may have misgivings about the interview and its end result. It is important, therefore, to eliminate as much
of their uncertainty as possible. To do so, the investigator should give each witness a good explanation of the
investigator’s role, the witness’s role and rights (including advising the witness who will have access to the transcript), the purpose of the interview, and the interview process. Witnesses should be made aware that their
participation is important in the determination of cause and the prevention of a recurrence.
The main body
The right question asked in the right way at the right time is a powerful tool; it focuses on the important
information; it terminates unproductive conversation; it helps people to concentrate their thoughts; and it allows
the interview to flow smoothly.
Often the easiest and most effective way to begin an interview is with a free recall type question, wherein
witnesses are allowed to tell their story without interruption. The investigator should be attentive to what is
being said and should refrain from any gestures or mannerisms that may lead witnesses. This approach is nonthreatening, it allows witnesses to believe that what they have to say is important, it begins to establish a
rapport between the investigator and the witness, and it gives the investigator a baseline of uncontaminated
information.
When it is apparent that a witness has nothing further to say, the investigator can begin to question in more
detail. However, there is no need to change the approach — the investigator can begin the questioning for each
specific topic with a general question, becoming more specific as the witness becomes more specific with the
answers. By getting witnesses to co-operate in a general way, the investigator increases the likelihood that they
will subsequently co-operate in more specific ways.
There are various types of questions, each of which will elicit a different type of response. The general or
“open” question is the least leading and allows witnesses to answer in their own way and to formulate opinions
as they see fit. With next of kin, a question such as “I didn’t know your son; I wonder if you would tell me about
him?” achieves the same result as a free recall question — witnesses begin to talk about something with which
they are familiar and which is non-threatening. Often witnesses will begin to answer a question before it is fully
asked; investigators can take advantage of this by using open-ended or trailing-off questions (e.g. “You said
earlier that your training was …”), which can evoke rapid and accurate descriptions of the subject matter. They
also lead to more witness participation.

The open question may not produce exactly the answer expected, and it may be appropriate for the
investigator to redirect witnesses by means of a supplementary question which is more specific. There is a
caution, however, that should be acknowledged when asking more specific questions — the more specific the
question becomes the more likely it is to lead witnesses, possibly pressuring them to remember something that
they do not know or did not observe. “Was the pilot fatigued?” is leading, in that it contains a possible answer
and thus contaminates the information; it would be better to ask the witness to “describe the pilot’s physical
condition and mental outlook toward the job recently”. “How proficient was the pilot at single-engine
go-arounds?” uses a “marked” word (proficient) and effectively eliminates any neutrality that the investigator
may be trying to achieve with the question. By using unmarked words and by setting the stage with a series
of questions, the investigator can obtain the information without contaminating the response — “What is the
policy for practising single-engine go-arounds?” followed by “When was the last time the pilot practised this
procedure?” and ending with “Describe the procedure used by the pilot during the last practice session”. This
approach is neutral and does not lead the witness.
The “closed” question (one evoking a “yes” or “no” response), produces limited information and should be
avoided, unless specifically intended. “Did your husband talk to you about the problems he was having with
the chief-pilot?” “Was the co-pilot uncomfortable about flying into that airport because she had not flown that
route before?” “Did the captain and first officer have problems in working together as a crew?” are all questions
that can elicit a yes or no response, and the investigator will have to try another tactic to get more complete
responses. The investigator may be more successful by phrasing the questions as follows — “How did your
husband feel about flying with this company?” “You mentioned that the co-pilot was not comfortable about flying
into that airport, why not?” “Describe the captain and co-pilot’s working relationship”.
Occasionally, the investigator will have to ask questions which are more personal in nature and thus require
an indirect approach. For example, the investigator believes that the deceased pilot was under a great deal
of domestic stress because of marital problems; asking the pilot’s spouse “Was there anything that may have
been upsetting your husband on the day of the accident?” or “Did you notice any change in your husband’s
behaviour in the recent past?” will increase the chance of getting closer to the truth of the matter. The indirect
approach in delicate situations also eliminates the possibility of bringing the interview to an abrupt end as may
be the case with a more direct question such as “Were you and your husband having marital problems”?
Questions should be brief, clear, and unambiguous. They should be relevant to the information required
and be presented one at a time. Jargon and terminology that may confuse or intimidate witnesses should be
avoided. Some witnesses who have had difficulty recalling events benefit from hearing the tape recording of
their initial description of the occurrence. While listening to the account they suddenly recall forgotten
information. Near the end of an interview, witnesses should be asked if they have any other information to add
or if they have any questions.
The closing
The closing is the time to summarize the key points and to verify understanding of the information obtained;
to assure the witness that the interview has been valuable; to establish the availability of the witness at a future
date should that be necessary; and to indicate the availability of the investigator should the witness wish to
provide additional information or enquire about the progress of the investigation.

Assessment
None of the information gained in an interview should be accepted at face value. Issues such as health can
be verified against medical records; fatigue against work schedules; attitudes toward management, training


and maintenance against interviews with family members, friends and colleagues, etc. By comparing the
information gathered during interviews to information gleaned from other sources, the investigator will be able
to piece together the puzzle more accurately and establish the credibility of various witnesses. Weight factoring
of interview information and matrix evaluation of information obtained from several witnesses are effective
methods of quantifying and qualifying that information.
In assessing the validity and significance of the information, the investigator should remember that witnesses’ portrayals of facts are influenced by personal biases — so too are the investigator’s. One example of
bias is the “halo effect”, which occurs when an investigator forms a global impression (either positive or
negative) of a person, based on one characteristic that biases the interviewer’s assessment of the other
person’s ideas. For example, a seemingly comfortable, self-assured person may given more credibility than
is warranted.
In summary, an interview is a dynamic event conducted in real time; planning, experience and responsiveness on the part of the interviewee are all keys to a successful outcome. While re-interviews are possible, there
is no substitute for the effective first interview.

Physical — characteristics of the individual
Physical characteristics

Sensory limitations

Other physical limitations

Size
Weight
Strength
Age
Sensory threshold (vision/visual)
Hearing
Vestibular (inner ear)
Proprioception (sense receptors — muscles/joints)
Smell
Touch
Kinaesthetic (muscle movement)
“G” tolerance

Attention

Attitudes

Physiological — the person’s well-being
Health/lifestyle

Fatigue

Drugs

Alcohol
Incapacitation

Decompression/diving
Other physiological
limitations

Disease
Fitness
Diet
Obesity
Age
Stress
Smoker (heavy)
Pregnancy
Blood donation
Other predisposing condition
Fatigue — acute
Fatigue — chronic
Fatigue — skill
Fatigue — other
Crew rest
Sleep deficit/disruption
Other sleep disorder
Circadian dysrhythmia (jet lag)
Medication —over-the-counter
Medication — prescription
Drugs — illicit
Other stimulants (coffee,
cigarettes)
Alcohol— impairment
Alcohol — hangover
Alcohol — addiction
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Hypoxia/anoxia
Hyperventilation
Loss of consciousness
Motion sickness
Nauseating fumes
Toxic fumes
Other medical
Decompression
Trapped gas effects
Underwater diving

Information processing

Experience/recency

Knowledge
Training

Planning
Mental state

Personality

Workload

Psychological — the person’s mental well-being
Perceptions/illusions

Situational awareness
Disorientation — spatial
Disorientation — visual
Disorientation — temporal
Disorientation — geographic (lost)

Other psychological
limitations

53

Disorientation — other
Vertigo
Illusion — visual
Illusion — vestibular
Attention span
Inattention
Distraction
Channelized attention
Fascination
Vigilance
Attention — other
Motivation
Attitude
Habituation
Boredom/monotony
Complacency
Mind set/expectancy
False hypothesis
Get-home-itis
Confidence — in A/C
Confidence — in equipment
Confidence — self
Attitudes — other
Mental capacity
Decision-making
Judgement
Memory
Forgetting
Co-ordination/timing
Information processing — other
Experience — in position
Experience — on instruments
Experience — on A/C type
Experience — total A/C
Experience — other
Recency — in position
Recency — on instruments
Recency — on A/C type
Recency — on aerodrome/route
Recency — other
Competence
Skill/technique
Airmanship
Training — initial
Training — on-the-job
Training — ground
Training — flight
Training — recurrent
Planning — pre-flight
Planning — in-flight
Emotional state
Anxiety
Apprehension
Panic
Arousal level/reactions
Mental pressure — self stress
Type — aggressive
Type — assertive
Type — non-assertive
Type — other
Task saturation
Underload
Situational awareness
Prioritization

Psychosocial — the person’s interaction
with the non-work community
Off-duty problems

Other psychosocial
limitations

Mental pressure
Interpersonal conflict
Personal loss
Financial problems
Significant lifestyle changes
Culture
Family pressure

Human-environment (internal) — the interaction
of the person with the environment in the
immediate work area
Environment

THE INTERFACES BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS
AND THEIR WORK
Between people — the interaction of the person
with other persons in the workplace
Oral communication

Visual signals

Crew interactions

Controllers

Passengers
Other interaction

Misinterpretation
Phraseology
Language barrier
Readback/hearback
Other communications
Signage
Ground/hand signals
Body language
Data link
Crew supervision
Crew briefing
Crew co-ordination
Crew compatibility
Crew resource management
Crew task assignment
Crew — other behaviour
Controller supervision
Controller briefing
Controller co-ordination
Controller — other
Passenger behaviour

Human-machine — the interaction of the person
with the equipment at the workstation
Equipment

Other interaction

Written information

Computers
Automation

Other human-software
interaction

Human-environment (external) — the interaction
of the person with the weather and the
environment outside the immediate work area
Weather/geography

Illusion

Manuals
Checklists
Publications
Regulations
Maps and charts
NOTAMs
Standard operating procedures
Computer software
User-friendliness
Operator workload
Monitoring task
Task saturation
Situational awareness
Skill maintenance

Weather visibility
Turbulence
Infrastructure
Time of day
Lighting/glare
Other air traffic
Windblast
Somatogravic
Somatogyral
The leans
Coriolis
Empty field myopia
White-out
Flicker vertigo
Aerodrome — landing illusions
Illusions — other

Worker-management — the interaction of
the worker with the management
Personnel

Instrument/controls design
Instrument/controls location
Workspace layout
Workspace standardization
Personal comfort
Motor workload
Information displays
Obstacles to vision
Alerting and warnings
Eye reference position

Human-system support — the interaction of the person
with the supporting systems for the workplace

Heat
Cold
Ambient pressure
Illumination
Glare
Acceleration
Effect of noise
Noise interference
Vibration
Air quality
Humidity
Pollution/fumes
Ozone
Radiation
Other physical working conditions

Supervision
Regulatory requirements

Labour relations
Pressures
Other human-environment
interaction

Personnel recruitment
Personnel staffing
Personnel training
Personnel policies
Remuneration/incentives
Personnel requirements
Personnel scheduling
Crew pairing
Seniority
Resource allocation
Operational support
Operational control
Instructions/directions/orders
Managerial operating pressure
Operational supervision
Quality control standards
Qualification — in position
Qualification — on type
Certification
Medical certificate
Licence/rating
Non-compliance
Infraction history
Other regulatory factors
Employee/management relations
Industrial action
Union/professional group
Mental pressure — operational
Morale
Peer pressure


The most useful sources of supporting factual information come from reference and data bases directly related
to the aviation operational environment, because these can be most easily generalized to the factual data
pertaining to an aviation accident. The data from these data bases can be used (with some caution) to answer
the question “What are the frequencies of such occurrences or behaviours?” (i.e. how many accidents or
incidents have involved the same performance shortcomings?). Of course, specific information about the
sample characteristics of the data bases being examined, and about the exposure rates of aircraft or pilots in
similar situations is necessary in order to reach any conclusions about probabilities of similar accidents or
incidents occurring again. Some examples of such data sources follow.


Manufacturer accident/incident
data bases
Several aircraft manufacturers maintain their own accident/incident data bases for their own use and for that
of their customers. Some of these data bases are available to the public. One example of manufacturer
accident/incident data bases which may be of interest to the investigator follows.

base of all commercial jet aircraft accidents (excluding Russian manufactured or operated aircraft and
military operators of commercial-type aircraft). Accident data are obtained from government accident
reports, operators, manufacturers, and various government and private information services. Accident
selection essentially corresponds to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board’s (NTSB) accident
definition. Variables of interest in this data base are phase of flight (workload considerations), aircraft type
(design) cause factors (including primary flight crew).

Accident/incident
voluntary reporting systems
Much valuable Human Factors information is available from largely confidential reporting systems used by
several States to collect accident and incident information from involved pilots, controllers and other aviation
personnel. These reporting systems are voluntary (the person experiencing, or with knowledge of, the incident
is under no obligation to make a report), and usually some amount of protection is granted to the reporter, who
in most cases has committed an unintentional error while flying or controlling an aircraft. The reporter may be
guaranteed some degree of immunity from legal action (e.g. suspension or revocation of pilot licence) in
exchange for which the agency collecting the reports is afforded an insightful look at the conditions underlying
the incident. This kind of information is nearly impossible to obtain after an accident or incident using normal
investigative methods, either because the pilot is deceased or because the reporter (pilot, controller or other)
is not forthcoming for fear of reprisals from the government licensing agency, police or employer.
In general, reports from involved personnel, whether gathered by an investigator post-incident or reported
by the involved person to a confidential reporting system, are vulnerable to untruths and inconsistencies and
should be considered by the investigator as just another piece of information to be weighed and validated.
Confidential reporting systems are susceptible to misinterpretation if the investigator attempts to make
statistical inferences about the data, incorrectly assuming the sample in this type of data base is comparable
to the sample in a State investigative accident data base such as the ICAO ADREP data base or the NTSB
data base in the United States.
Confidential reporting systems contain only information voluntarily reported. Depending upon the level of
immunity accorded and upon the types of errors for which such immunity is granted, levels of reports for certain
types of errors may be inflated. For example, in the United States’ Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS),
which is jointly run by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), a large percentage of reports involve deviations from assigned altitudes, because pilots
who report these deviations to ASRS are protected from suspensions of their licences (the common
punishment for such a deviation).
Therefore, the investigator who chooses to use data from confidential reporting systems should consult
administrators of these data bases to understand the significance of the data. As with the accident/incident data
bases, these data can be very helpful as long as the investigator understands the scope and limitations of the
data base.

Notwithstanding the fact that human performance investigators need not be specialists in human performance,
generalist investigators must possess an over-all awareness and understanding of human performance concepts and principles, and their application to aviation, if they are to be successful human performance investigators. To this end, it is essential that they all receive a minimal level of relevant training. Given the requisite
training, the experience accident investigator should be able to conduct all but the most specialised aspects
of the human performance investigation.
Human performance investigation training should include guidance on the interdisciplinary nature of the
human performance investigation, fundamental areas of examination, data that should be collected, data
sources, data collection methods including interview techniques, and analytical techniques. Training should
also include general guidance on recommended reference material and on the type of specialists that are
available to assist in the investigation of human performance, where they can be found and when it would be
appropriate to employ them.
Several sources of general education courses in human performance concepts exist. They include both
educational institutions and private contractors. New programmes are being constantly developed and to the
extent that ICAO is aware of new programmes, the Organization will provide information to those interested.
A list of example courses and sources can be found in Human Factors Digest No. 1 — Fundamental Human
Factors Concepts.
Courses which focus specifically on the investigation of human performance are less prevalent. Information
on course availability should be sought from national accident investigation agencies.
Practices is regarded as desirable in the interest of
safety, regularity or efficiency of international air
navigation. Knowledge of any differences between the
national regulations or practices of a State and those
established by an International Standard is essential to
the safety or regularity of international air navigation.
In the event of non-compliance with an International
Standard, a State has, in fact, an obligation, under
Article 38 of the Convention, to notify the Council of
any differences. Knowledge of differences from
Recommended Practices may also be important for the
safety of air navigation and, although the Convention
does not impose any obhgation with regard thereto, the
Counci\ has invited Contracting States to notify such
differences in addition to those relating to International
Standards .
Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS) are
approved by the Council for world-wide application.
They contain, for the most part, operating procedures

regarded as not yet having attained a sufficient degree
of maturity for adoption as International Standards and
Recommended Practices, as well as material of a more
permanent character which is considered too detailed
for incorporation in an Annex, or is susceptible to
frequent amendment, for which the processes of the
Convention would be too cumbersome.
Regional Supplementary Procedures (SUPPS) have a
status similar to that of PANS in that they are approved
by the Council, but only for application in the respective
regions. They are prepared in consolidated form, since
certain of the procedures apply to overlapping regions
or are common to two or more regions.

The following publications are prepared by authority
of the Secretary General in accordance with the
principles and policies approved by the Council.
Technical Manuals provide guidance and information in amplification of the International Standards,
Recommended Practices and FANS, the implementation of which they are designed to facilitate.
Air Navigation Plans detail requirements for facilities and services for international air navigation in the
respective ICAO Air Navigation Regions. They are
prepared on the authority of the Secretary General on
the basis of recommendations of regional air navigation
meetings and of the Council action thereon. The plans
are amended periodically to reflect changes in requirements and in the status of implementation of the
recommended facilities and services.